[II]

That was Wednesday; on Thursday Tony felt well again. He had a meeting
of the county council in the morning. In the afternoon he went down to
the home farm and discussed a new kind of tractor with his agent. From
then onwards he was able to say to himself, "This time to-morrow Brenda
and Jock will be here." He dined in front of the fire in the library. He
had given up the diet some weeks ago. ("Ambrose, when I'm alone I don't
really need a long dinner. In future I'll just have two courses.") He
looked over some accounts his agent had left for him and then went to
bed, saying to himself, "When I wake up it will be the week-end."

But there was a telegram for him next morning from Jock, saying, _Week
end impossible have to go to constituency how about one after next_. He
wired back, _Delighted any time always here_. "I suppose he's made it up
with that girl," Tony reflected.

There was also a note from Brenda, written in pencil:

    Coming Sat. with Polly and a friend of Polly's called Veronica
    in P.'s car. Perhaps Daisy Maids and luggage on 3.18. Will you
    tell Ambrose and Mrs Mossop. We had better open Lyonesse for
    Polly you know what she is about comfort. Veronica can go
    anywhere--not Galahad. Polly says she's v. amusing. Also Mrs
    Beaver coming, please don't mind it is only on business, she
    thinks she can do something to morning-room. Polly bringing
    chauffeur. By the way I'm leaving Grimshawe at Hetton next week
    tell Mrs Mossop. It's a bore and expense boarding her out in
    London. In fact I think I might do without her altogether, what
    do you think; except she's useful for sewing. Longing to see
    John again. All going back Sunday evening. Keep _sober_,
    darling. _Try._

    x x x x x x

    B.

Tony found very little to occupy his time on Friday. His letters were
all finished by ten o'clock. He went down to the farm but they had no
business for him there. The duties which before had seemed so
multifarious, now took up a very small part of his day; he had not
realized how many hours he used to waste with Brenda. He watched John
riding in the paddock. The boy clearly bore him ill will for their
quarrel on Wednesday; when he applauded a jump, John said, "She usually
does better than this." Later, "When's mummy coming down?"

"Not till to-morrow."

"Oh."

"I've got to go over to Little Bayton this afternoon. Would you like to
come too and perhaps we could see the kennels?"

John had for weeks past been praying for this expedition. "No, thank
you," he said. "I want to finish a picture I'm painting."

"You can do that any time."

"I want to do it this afternoon."

When Tony had left them, Ben said, "Whatever made you speak to your dad
like that for? You've been going on about seeing the kennels since
Christmas."

"Not with _him_," said John.

"You ungrateful little bastard, that's a lousy way to speak of your
dad."

"And you ought not to say bastard or lousy in front of me, nanny says
not."

So Tony went over alone to Little Bayton, where he had some business to
discuss with Colonel Brink. He hoped they would ask him to stay on, but
the Colonel and his wife were themselves going out to tea, so he drove
back in the dusk to Hetton.

A thin mist lay breast-high over the park; the turrets and battlements
of the abbey stood grey and flat; the boiler man was hauling down the
flag on the main tower.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"My poor Brenda, it's an appalling room," said Mrs Beaver.

"It's not one we use a great deal," said Tony very coldly.

"I should think not," said the one they called Veronica.

"I can't see much wrong with it," said Polly, "except it's a bit
mouldy."

"You see," Brenda explained, not looking at Tony. "What I thought was
that I must have _one_ habitable room downstairs. At present there's
only the smoking-room and the library. The drawing-room is vast and
quite out of the question. I thought what I needed was a small
sitting-room more or less to myself. Don't you think it has
possibilities?"

"But, my angel, the _shape's_ all wrong," said Daisy, "and that
chimney-piece--what is it made of, pink granite, and all the plaster
work and the dado. _Everything's_ horrible. It's so _dark_."

"I know exactly what Brenda wants," said Mrs Beaver more moderately. "I
don't think it will be impossible. I must think about it. As Veronica
says, the structure does rather limit one... you know, I think the only
thing to do would be to disregard it altogether and find some treatment
so definite that it _carried_ the room, if you see what I mean...
supposing we covered the walls with white chromium plating and had
natural sheepskin carpet... I wonder if that would be running you in
for more than you meant to spend?"

"I'd blow the whole thing sky-high," said Veronica.

Tony left them to their discussion.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"D'you really want Mrs Beaver to do up the morning-room?"

"Not if you don't, sweet."

"But can you imagine it--white chromium plating?"

"Oh, that was just an idea."

Tony walked in and out between Morgan le Fay and Guinevere as he always
did while they were dressing. "I say," he said, returning with his
waistcoat. "You aren't going away to-morrow too, are you?"

"Must."

He went back to Morgan le Fay for his tie and bringing it to Brenda's
room again, sat by her side at the dressing table to fasten it.

"By the way," said Brenda, "what did you think about keeping on
Grimshawe?--it seems rather a waste."

"You used always to say you couldn't get on without her."

"Yes, but now I'm living at the flat everything's so simple."

"_Living?_ Darling, you talk as though you had settled there for good."

"D'you mind moving a second, sweet? I can't see properly."

"Brenda, how long are you going on with this course of economics?"

"Me? I don't know."

"But you must have some idea?"

"Oh, it's surprising what a lot there is to learn... I was so backward
when I started..."

"Brenda..."

"Now run and put on your coat. They'll all be downstairs waiting for
us."

That evening Polly and Mrs Beaver played backgammon. Brenda and Veronica
sat together on the sofa sewing and talking about their needlework;
occasionally there were bursts of general conversation between the
women; they had the habit of lapsing into a jargon of their own which
Tony did not understand; it was a thieves' slang, by which the syllables
of each word were transposed. Tony sat just outside the circle reading
under another lamp.

That night when they went upstairs, the guests came to sit in Brenda's
room and talk to her while she went to bed. Tony could hear their low
laughter through the dressing-room door. They had boiled water in an
electric kettle and were drinking Sedobrol together.

Presently, still laughing, they left, and Tony went into Brenda's room.
It was in darkness but hearing him come and seeing the square of light
in the doorway she turned on the little lamp by the bedside.

"Why, Tony," she said.

She was lying on the dais with her head deep back in the pillow; her
face was shining with the grease she used for cleaning it; one bare arm
on the quilted eiderdown, left there from turning the switch. "Why,
Tony," she said, "I was almost asleep."

"Very tired?"

"Mm."

"Want to be left alone?"

"So tired... and I've just drunk a lot of that stuff of Polly's."

"I see... well, good night."

"Good night... don't mind, do you?... so tired."

He crossed to the bed and kissed her; she lay quite still, with closed
eyes. Then he turned out the light and went back to the dressing-room.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Lady Brenda not ill, I hope?"

"No, nothing serious, thank you very much. She gets rather done up in
London, you know, during the week, and likes to take Sunday quietly."

"And how are the great studies progressing?"

"Very well, I gather. She seems keen on it still."

"Splendid. We shall all be coming to her soon to solve our economic
problems. But I daresay you and John miss her?"

"Yes, we do rather."

"Well, please give her my kindest regards."

"I will indeed. Thank you so much."

Tony left the church porch and made his accustomed way to the hothouses;
a gardenia for himself; some almost black carnations for the ladies.
When he reached the room where they were sitting there was a burst of
laughter. He paused on the threshold, rather bewildered.

"Come in, darling, it isn't anything. It's only we had a bet on what
coloured buttonhole you'd be wearing and none of us won."

They still giggled a little as they pinned on the flowers he had brought
them; all except Mrs Beaver, who said, "Any time you are buying cuttings
or seeds do get them through me. I've made quite a little business of
it, perhaps you didn't know... all kinds of rather unusual flowers. I
do everything like that for Sylvia Newport and all sorts of people."

"You must talk to my head man about it."

"Well, to tell you the truth I _have_--this morning while you were in
church. He seems quite to understand."

They left early, so as to reach London in time for dinner. In the car
Daisy said, "Golly, what a house."

"Now you can see what I've been through all these years."

"My poor Brenda," said Veronica, unpinning her carnation and throwing it
from the window into the side of the road.

"You know," Brenda confided next day, "I'm not _absolutely_ happy about
Tony."

"What's the old boy been up to?" asked Polly.

"Nothing much yet, but I do see it's pretty boring for him at Hetton all
this time."

"I shouldn't worry."

"Oh, I'm not _worrying_. It's only, supposing he took to drink or
something. It would make everything very difficult."

"I shouldn't have said that was his thing... We must get him interested
in a girl."

"If only we could... Who is there?"

"There's always old Sybil."

"Darling, he's known her all his life."

"Or Souki de Foucauld-Esterhazy."

"He isn't his best with Americans."

"Well, we'll find him someone."

"The trouble is that I've become such a habit with him--he won't take
easily to a new one... ought she to be like me, or quite different?"

"I'd say different, but it's hard to tell."

They discussed this problem in all its aspects.


[III]

Brenda wrote:

    Darling Tony,

    Sorry not to have written or rung up but I've had such a busy
    time with bimetallism. V. complicated.

    Coming down Saturday with Polly again. Good her coming
    twice--Lyonesse can't be as beastly as most of the rooms, can
    it.

    Also charming girl I have taken up with who I want us to be kind
    to. She's had a _terrible_ life and she lives in one of these
    flats, called Jenny Abdul Akbar. Not black but married one. Get
    her to tell you. She'll come by train 3.18 I expect. Must stop
    now and go to lecture.

    Keep away from the Demon Rum.

    x x x x x x

    Brenda.

    Saw Jock last night at Caf? de Paris with shameless blonde. Who?

    Gin. No, Djin--how?--has rheumatism and Marjorie is v. put out
    about it. She thinks his pelvis is out of place and Cruttwell
    won't do him which is pretty mean considering all the people she
    has brought there.

"Are you _certain_ Jenny will be Tony's tea?"

"You can't ever be certain," said Polly. "She bores my pants off, but
she's a good trier."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Is mummy coming down to-day, daddy?"

"Yes."

"Who else?"

"Someone called Jenny Abdul Akbar."

"What a silly name. Is she foreign?"

"I don't know."

"Sounds foreign, doesn't she, daddy? D'you think she won't be able to
talk any English? Is she black?"

"Mummy says not."

"Oh... who else?"

"Lady Cockpurse."

"The monkey-woman. You know she wasn't a bit like a monkey except
perhaps her face and I don't think she had a tail because I looked as
close as anything... unless perhaps she has it rolled up between her
legs. D'you think she has, daddy?"

"I shouldn't be surprised."

"_Very_ uncomfortable."

Tony and John were friends again; but it had been a leaden week.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was part of Polly Cockpurse's plan to arrive late at Hetton. "Give
the girl a chance to get down to it," she said. So she and Brenda did
not leave London until Jenny was already on her way from the station. It
was a day of bitter cold and occasional rain. The resolute little figure
huddled herself in the rugs until she reached the gates. Then she opened
her bag, tucked up her veil, shook out her powder puff and put her face
to rights. She licked the rouge from her finger with a sharp red tongue.

Tony was in the smoking-room when she was announced; the library was now
too noisy during the daytime, for there were men at work on the walls of
the morning-room next door, tearing down the plaster tracery.

"Princess Abdul Akbar."

He rose to greet her. She was preceded by a heavy odour of musk.

"Oh, Mr Last," she said, "what a sweet old place this is."

"I'm afraid it's been restored a great deal," said Tony.

"Ah, but its _atmosphere_. I always think that's what counts in a house.
Such dignity, and repose. But of course you're used to it. When you've
been very unhappy as I have, you appreciate these things."

Tony said, "I'm afraid Brenda hasn't arrived yet. She's coming by car
with Lady Cockpurse."

"Brenda's been _such_ a friend to me." The Princess took off her furs
and sat down on the stool before the fire, looking up at Tony. "D'you
mind if I take off my hat?"

"No, no... of course."

She threw it on to the sofa and shook out her hair, which was dead black
and curled. "D'you know, Mr Last, I'm going to call you Teddy right
away. You don't think that very fresh of me? And you must call me Jenny.
"Princess" is so formal, isn't it, and suggests tight trousers and gold
braid... Of course," she went on, stretching out her hands to the fire
and letting her hair fall forwards a little across her face, "my husband
was not called "Prince" in Morocco; his title was Moulay--but there's no
proper equivalent for a woman, so I've always called myself Princess in
Europe... Moulay is _far_ higher really... my husband was a descendant
of the Prophet. Are you interested in the East?"

"No... yes. I mean I know very little about it."

"It has an uncanny fascination for me. You must go there, Teddy. I know
you'd like it. I've been saying the same to Brenda."

"I expect you'd like to see your room," said Tony. "They'll bring tea
soon."

"No, I'll stay here. I like just to curl up like a cat in front of the
fire, and if you're nice to me I'll purr, and if you're cruel I shall
pretend not to notice--just like a cat... Shall I purr, Teddy?"

"Er... yes... do, please, if that's what you like doing."

"Englishmen are so gentle and considerate. It's wonderful to be back
among them... mine own people. Sometimes when I look back at my life,
especially at times like this, among lovely old English things and kind
people, I think the whole thing must be a frightful nightmare... then I
remember my _scars_..."

"Brenda tells me you've taken one of the flats in the same house as
hers. They must be very convenient."

"How English you are, Teddy--so shy of talking about personal things,
intimate things... I like you for that, you know. I love everything
that's solid and homely and _good_ after... after all I've been
through."

"You're not studying economics too, are you, like Brenda?"

"No; is Brenda? She never told me. What a wonderful person she is. When
_does_ she find the time?"

"Ah, here comes tea at last," said Tony. "I hope you allow yourself to
eat muffins. So many of our guests nowadays are on a diet. I think
muffins one of the few things that make the English winter endurable."

"Muffins stand for so much," said Jenny.

She ate heartily; often she ran her tongue over her lips, collecting
crumbs that had become embedded there and melted butter from the muffin.
One drop of butter fell on her chin and glittered there unobserved
except by Tony. It was a relief to him when John Andrew was brought in.

"Come and be introduced to Princess Abdul Akbar."

John Andrew had never before seen a Princess; he gazed at her,
fascinated.

"Aren't you going to give me a kiss?"

He walked over to her and she kissed him on the mouth.

"Oh," he said, recoiling and rubbing away the taste of the lipstick; and
then, "What a beautiful smell."

"It's my last link with the East," she said.

"You've got butter on your chin."

She reached for her bag, laughing. "Why, so I have. Teddy, you _might_
have told me."

"Why do you call daddy Teddy?"

"Because I hope we are going to be great friends."

"What a funny reason."

John stayed with them for an hour, and all the time watched, fascinated.
"Have you got a crown?" he asked. "How did you learn to speak English?
What is that big ring made of? Did it cost much? Why are your nails that
colour? Can you ride?"

She answered all his questions, sometimes enigmatically with an eye on
Tony. She took out a little heavily scented handkerchief and showed John
the monogram. "That is my only crown... now," she said. She told him
about the horses she used to have--glossy black, with arched necks; foam
round their silver bits; plumes tossing on their foreheads; silver studs
on the harness, crimson saddle cloths. "On the Moulay's birthday--"

"What's the Moulay?"

"A beautiful and a very bad man," she said gravely, "and on his birthday
all his horsemen used to assemble round a great square, with all their
finest clothes and trappings and jewels, with long swords in their
hands. The Moulay used to sit on a throne under a great crimson canopy."

"What's a canopy?"

"Like a tent," she said more sharply, and then, resuming her soft voice,
"and all the horsemen used to gallop across the plain, in a great cloud
of dust, waving their swords, straight towards the Moulay. And everyone
used to hold their breath, thinking the horsemen were bound to ride
right on top of the Moulay, but when they were a few feet away, as near
as I am to you, galloping at full speed, they used to rein their horses
back, up on to their hind legs and salute--"

"Oh, but they _shouldn't_," said John. "It's _very_ bad horsemanship
indeed. Ben says so."

"They're the most wonderful horsemen in the world. Everyone knows that."

"Oh, no, they can't be, if they do _that_. It's one of the _worst_
things. Were they natives?"

"Yes, of course."

"Ben says natives aren't humans at all really."

"Ah, but he's thinking of Negroes, I expect. These are pure Semitic
type."

"What's that?"

"The same as Jews."

"Ben says Jews are worse than natives."

"Oh dear, what a very severe boy you are. I was like that once. Life
teaches one to be tolerant."

"It hasn't taught Ben," said John. "When's mummy coming? I thought she'd
be here, otherwise I wouldn't have stopped painting my picture."

But when nanny came to fetch him, John, without invitation, went over
and kissed Jenny good night. "Good night, Johnny-boy," she said.

"What did you call me?"

"Johnny-boy."

"You are funny with names."

Upstairs, meditatively splashing his spoon in the bread and milk, he
said, "Nanny, I do think that Princess is beautiful, don't you?"

Nanny sniffed. "It would be a dull world if we all thought alike," she
said.

"She's more beautiful than Miss Tendril, even. I think she's the most
beautiful lady I've ever seen... D'you think she'd like to watch me
have my bath?"

Downstairs, Jenny said, "What a heavenly child... I love children. That
has been my great tragedy. It was when he found I couldn't have children
that the Moulay first showed the Other Side of his Nature. It wasn't my
fault... you see my womb is out of place... I don't know why I'm
telling you all this, but I feel you'll understand. It's such a _waste
of time_, isn't it, when one knows one is going to like someone and one
goes on _pretending_... I know at once if someone is going to be a real
friend..."

Polly and Brenda arrived just before seven. Brenda went straight up to
the nursery. "Oh, mummy," said John, "there's such a beautiful lady
downstairs. Do ask her to come and say good night. Nanny doesn't think
she'd want to."

"Did daddy seem to like her?"

"He didn't talk much... She doesn't know anything about horses or
natives but she _is_ beautiful. Please tell her to come up."

Brenda went downstairs and found Jenny with Polly and Tony in the
smoking-room. "You've made a wild success with John Andrew. He won't go
to sleep until he's seen you again."

They went up together, and Jenny said, "They're both such dears."

"Did you and Tony get on? I was so sorry not to be here when you
arrived."

"He was _so_ sympathetic and gentle... and so wistful."

They sat on John's small bed in the night-nursery. He threw the clothes
back and crawled out, nestling against Jenny. "Back to bed," she said,
"or I shall spank you."

"Would you do it hard? I shouldn't mind."

"Oh dear," said Brenda, "what a terrible effect you seem to have. He's
never like this as a rule."

When they had gone nanny threw open another window.

"Poof!" she said, "making the whole place stink."

"Don't you like it? _I_ think it's lovely."

Brenda took Polly up to Lyonesse. It was a large suite, fitted up with
satinwood for King Edward when, as Prince of Wales, he was once expected
at a shooting party; he never came.

"How's it going?" she asked anxiously.

"Too soon to tell. I'm sure it will be all right."

"She's got the wrong chap. John Andrew's mad about her... quite
embarrassing."

"I should say Tony was a slow starter. It's a pity she's got his name
wrong. Ought we to tell her?"

"No, let's leave it."

When they were dressing, Tony said, "Brenda, who _is_ this joke-woman?"

"Darling, don't you like her?"

The disappointment and distress in her tone were so clear that Tony was
touched. "I don't know about not liking her exactly. She's just a joke,
isn't she?"

"Is she... oh dear... She's had a terrible life, you know."

"So I gathered."

"Be nice to her, Tony, please."

"Oh, I'll be nice to her. Is she a Jewess?"

"I don't know. I never thought. Perhaps she is."

Soon after dinner Polly said she was tired and asked Brenda to come with
her while she undressed, "Leave the young couple to it," she whispered
outside the door.

"My dear, I don't believe it's going to be any good... the poor old
boy's got _some_ taste you know, and a sense of humour."

"She didn't show up too well at dinner, did she?"

"She will _go on_ so... and, after all, Tony's been used to me for
seven years. It's rather a sudden change."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Tired?"

"Mmm. Little bit."

"You gave me a pretty long bout of Abdul Akbar."

"I know. I'm sorry, darling, but Polly takes so long to get to bed...
Was it awful? I wish you liked her more."

"She's awful."

"One has to make allowances... she's got the most terrible scars."

"So she told me."

"I've seen them."

"Besides, I hoped to see something of you."

"Oh."

"Brenda, you aren't angry still about my getting tight that night and
waking you up?"

"No, sweet, do I seem angry?"

"...I don't know. You do rather... Has it been an amusing week?"

"Not amusing, very hard work. Bimetallism, you know."

"Oh, yes... well, I suppose you want to go to sleep."

"Mm... so tired. Good night, darling."

"Good night."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Can I go and say good morning to the Princess, mummy?"

"I don't expect she's awake yet."

"Please, mummy, may I go and see? I'll just peep and, if she's asleep,
go away."

"I don't know what room she's in."

"Galahad, my lady," said Grimshawe, who was putting out her clothes.

"Oh dear, why was she put there?"

"It was Mr Last's orders, my lady."

"Well, she's probably awake, then."

John slipped out of the room and trotted down the passage to Galahad.
"May I come in?"

"Hullo, Johnny-boy. Come in."

He swung on the handles of the door, half in, half out of the room.
"Have you had breakfast? Mummy said you wouldn't be awake."

"I've been awake a long time. You see I was once very badly hurt, and
now I don't always sleep well. Even the softest beds are too hard for me
now."

"Ooh. What did you do? Was it a motor-car accident?"

"Not an accident, Johnny-boy, not an accident... but come in. It's cold
with the door open. Look, there are some grapes here. Would you like to
eat them?"

Johnny climbed on to the bed. "What are you going to do to-day?"

"I don't know yet. I haven't been told."

"Well, I'll tell you. We'll go to church in the morning because I have
to and then we'll go and look at Thunderclap and I'll show you the place
we jump and then you can come with me while I have dinner because I have
it early and afterwards we can go down to Bruton Wood and we needn't
take nanny because it makes her so muddy and you can see where they dug
out a fox in the drain just outside the wood, he nearly got away, and
then you can come and have tea in the nursery and I've got a little
gramophone Uncle Reggie gave me for Christmas and it plays "When Father
Papered the Parlour", do you know that song? Ben can sing it and I've
got some books to show you and a picture I did of the battle of Marston
Moor."

"I think that sounds a lovely day. But don't you think I ought to spend
some time with daddy and mummy and Lady Cockpurse?"

"Oh, _them_... besides, it's all my foot about Lady Cockpurse having a
tail. Please, you _will_ spend the day with me?"

"Well, we'll see."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"She's gone to church with him. That's a good sign, isn't it?"

"Well, not really, Polly. He likes going alone, or with me. It's the
time he gossips to the village."

"She won't stop him."

"I'm afraid you don't understand the old boy altogether. He's much odder
than you'd think."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"I could see from your sermon that you knew the East, Rector."

"Yes, yes, most of my life."

"It has an uncanny fascination, hasn't it?"

"Oh, come on," said John, pulling at her coat. "We must go and see
Thunderclap."

So Tony returned alone with the buttonholes.

After luncheon Brenda said, "Why don't you show Jenny the house?"

"Oh yes, _do_."

When they reached the morning-room he said, "Brenda's having it done
up."

There were planks and ladders and heaps of plaster about.

"Oh, Teddy, what a shame. I do hate seeing things modernized."

"It isn't a room we used very much."

"No, but still..." She stirred the mouldings of fleur-de-lis that
littered the floor, fragments of tarnished gilding and dusty
stencil-work. "You know, Brenda's been a wonderful friend to me. I
wouldn't say anything against her... but ever since I came here I've
been wondering whether she really understands this beautiful place and
all it means to you."

"Tell me more about your terrible life," said Tony, leading her back to
the central hall.

"You _are_ shy of talking about yourself, aren't you, Teddy? It's a
mistake, you know, to keep things bottled up. I've been very unhappy
too."

Tony looked about him desperately in search of help; and help came. "Oh,
there you are," said a firm, child's voice. "Come on. We're going down
to the woods now. We must hurry, otherwise it will be dark."

"Oh, Johnny-boy, must I really? I was just talking to daddy."

"_Come on._ It's all arranged. And afterwards you're to be allowed to
have tea with me upstairs."

Tony crept into the library, habitable to-day, since the workmen were at
rest. Brenda found him there two hours later. "_Tony_, here all alone?
We thought you were with Jenny. What have you done with her?"

"John took her off... just in time before I said something rude."

"Oh dear... well there's only me and Polly in the smoking-room. Come
and have some tea. You look all funny--have you been asleep?"

                 *        *        *        *        *

"We must write it down a failure, definitely."

"What _does_ the old boy expect? It isn't as though he was everybody's
money."

"I daresay it would have been all right, if she hadn't got his name
wrong."

"Anyway, this lets _you_ out. You've done far more than most wives would
to cheer the old boy up."

"Yes, that's certainly true," said Brenda.


[IV]

Another five days; then Brenda came to Hetton again. "I shan't be here
next week-end," she said, "I'm going to stay with Veronica."

"Am I asked?"

"Well, you _were_, of course, but I refused for you. You know you always
hate staying away."

"I wouldn't mind coming."

"Oh, darling, I wish I'd known. Veronica would have loved it so... but
I'm afraid it will be too late now. She's only got a tiny house... to
tell you the truth I didn't think you liked her much."

"I hated her like hell."

"Well, then...?"

"Oh, it doesn't matter. I suppose you must go back on Monday? The hounds
are meeting on Wednesday, you know."

"Are we giving them a lawner?"

"Yes, darling, you know we do every year."

"So we do."

"You couldn't stay down till then?"

"Not possibly, darling. You see if I miss one lecture I get right behind
and can't follow the next. Besides, I am not mad keen to see the
hounds."

"Ben was asking if we'd let John go out."

"Oh, he's far too young."

"Not to hunt. But I thought he might bring his pony to the meet and ride
with them to the first covert. He'd love it so."

"Is it quite safe?"

"Oh, yes, surely?"

"Bless his heart, I wish I could be here to see him."

"Do change your mind."

"Oh no, that's quite out of the question. Don't make a thing about it,
Tony."

That was when she first arrived; later everything got better. Jock was
there that week-end, also Allan and Marjorie and another married couple
whom Tony had known all his life. Brenda had arranged the party for him
and he enjoyed it. He and Allan went out with rook rifles and shot
rabbits in the twilight; after dinner the four men played billiard fives
while one wife watched. "The old boy's happy as a lark," said Brenda to
Marjorie. "He's settling down wonderfully to the new r?gime."

They came in breathless and rather flushed for whisky and soda.

"Tony nearly had one through the window," said Jock.

That night Tony slept in Guinevere.

"Everything _is_ all right, isn't it?" he said once.

"Yes, of course, darling."

"I get depressed down here all alone and imagine things."

"You aren't to _brood_, Tony. You know that's one of the things that
aren't allowed."

"I won't brood any more," said Tony.

Next day Brenda came to church with him. She had decided to devote the
week-end wholly to him; it would be the last for some time.

"And how are the abstruse sciences, Lady Brenda?"

"Absorbing."

"We shall all be coming to you for advice about our overdrafts."

"Ha, ha."

"And how's Thunderclap?" asked Miss Tendril.

"I'm taking her out hunting on Wednesday," said John. He had forgotten
Princess Abdul Akbar in the excitement of the coming meet. "Please God
make there be a good scent. Please God make me see the kill. Please God
don't let me do anything wrong. God bless Ben and Thunderclap. Please
God make me jump an enormous great oxer," he had kept repeating
throughout the service.

Brenda did the round with Tony of cottages and hothouses; she helped him
choose his buttonhole.

Tony was in high spirits at luncheon. Brenda had begun to forget how
amusing he could be. Afterwards he changed into other clothes and went
with Jock to play golf. They stayed some time at the clubhouse. Tony
said, "We've got the hounds meeting at Hetton on Wednesday. Couldn't you
stay down till then?"

"Must be back. There's going to be a debate on the Pig Scheme."

"I wish you'd stay. Look here, why don't you ask that girl down?
Everyone goes to-morrow. You could ring her up, couldn't you?"

"I _could_."

"Would she hate it? She could have Lyonesse--Polly slept there two
week-ends running, so it can't be too uncomfortable."

"She'd probably love it. I'll ring up and ask her."

"Why don't you hunt too? There's a chap called Brinkwell who's got some
quite decent hirelings, I believe."

"Yes, I might."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Jock's staying on. He's having the Shameless Blonde down. You don't
mind?"

"Me? Of course not."

"This _has_ been a jolly week-end."

"I thought you were enjoying it."

"Just like old times--before the economics began."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Marjorie said to Jock, "D'you think Tony knows about Mr Beaver?"

"Not a thing."

"I haven't mentioned it to Allan. D'you suppose he knows?"

"I doubt it."

"Oh, Jock, how d'you think it'll end?"

"She'll get bored with Beaver soon enough."

"The trouble is that he doesn't care for her in the least. If he did, it
would soon be over... What an ass she is being."

"I should say she was managing it unusually well, if you ask me."

                 *        *        *        *        *

The other married couple said to each other, "D'you think Marjorie and
Allan know about Brenda?"

"I'm sure they don't."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda said to Allan, "Tony's as happy as a sandboy, isn't he?"

"Full of beans."

"I was getting worried about him... You don't think he's got any idea
about my goings on?"

"Lord no. It's the last thing that would come into his head."

Brenda said, "I don't want him to be unhappy, you know... Marjorie's
been frightfully governessy about the whole thing."

"Has she? I haven't discussed it with her."

"How did _you_ hear?"

"My dear girl, until this minute I didn't know you had any goings on.
And I'm not asking any questions about them now."

"Oh... I thought everyone knew."

"That's always the trouble with people when they start walking out. They
either think no one knows, or everybody. The truth is that a few people
like Polly and Sybil make a point of finding out about everyone's
private life; the rest of us just aren't interested."

"Oh."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Later he said to Marjorie, "Brenda tried to be confidential about Beaver
this evening."

"I didn't know you knew."

"Oh, I knew all right. But I wasn't going to let her feel important by
talking about it."

"I couldn't disapprove more of the whole thing. Do you know Beaver?"

"I've seen him about. Anyway, it's her business and Tony's, not ours."


[V]

Jock's blonde was called Mrs Rattery. Tony had conceived an idea of her
from what he overheard of Polly's gossip and from various fragments of
information let fall by Jock. She was a little over thirty. Somewhere in
the Cottesmore country there lived a long-legged, slightly discredited
Major Rattery, to whom she had once been married. She was an American by
origin, now totally denationalized, rich, without property or
possessions, except those that would pack in five vast trunks. Jock had
had his eye on her last summer at Biarritz and had fallen in with her
again in London where she played big bridge, very ably, for six or seven
hours a day and changed her hotel, on an average, once every three
weeks. Periodically she was liable to bouts of morphine; then she gave
up her bridge and remained for several days at a time alone in her hotel
suite, refreshed at intervals with glasses of cold milk.

She arrived by air on Monday afternoon. It was the first time that a
guest had come in this fashion and the household was appreciably
excited. Under Jock's direction the boiler man and one of the gardeners
pegged out a dust sheet in the park to mark a landing for her and lit a
bonfire of damp leaves to show the direction of the wind. The five
trunks arrived in the ordinary way by train, with an elderly,
irreproachable maid. She brought her own sheets with her in one of the
trunks; they were neither silk nor coloured, without lace or ornament of
any kind, except small, plain monograms.

Tony, Jock and John went out to watch her land. She climbed out of the
cockpit, stretched, unbuttoned the flaps of her leather helmet, and came
to meet them. "Forty-two minutes," she said, "not at all bad with the
wind against me."

She was tall and erect, almost austere in helmet and overalls; not at
all as Tony had imagined her. Vaguely, at the back of his mind he had
secreted the slightly absurd expectation of a chorus girl, in silk
shorts and brassi?re, popping out of an immense beribboned Easter egg
with a cry of "Whoopee, boys." Mrs Rattery's greetings were deft and
impersonal.

"Are you going to hunt on Wednesday?" asked John. "They're meeting here,
you know."

"I might go out for half the day, if I can find a horse. It'll be the
first time this year."

"It's my first time too."

"We shall both be terribly stiff." She spoke to him exactly as though he
were a man of her own age. "You'll have to show me the country."

"I expect they'll draw Bruton Wood first. There's a big fox there, daddy
and I saw him."

                 *        *        *        *        *

When they were alone together, Jock said, "It's delightful your coming
down. What d'you think of Tony?"

"Is he married to that rather lovely woman we saw at the Caf? de Paris?"

"Yes."

"The one you said was in love with that young man?"

"Yes."

"Funny of her... What's this one's name again?"

"Tony Last. It's a pretty ghastly house, isn't it?"

"Is it? I never notice houses much."

She was an easy guest to entertain. After dinner on Monday she produced
four packs of cards and laid out for herself on the smoking-room table a
very elaborate patience, which kept her engrossed all the evening.
"Don't wait up for me," she said. "I shall stay here until it comes out.
It often takes several hours."

They showed her where to put the lights out and left her to it.

Next day Jock said, "Have you got any pigs at the farm?"

"Yes."

"Would you mind if I went to see them?"

"Not in the least--but why?"

"And is there a man who looks after them, who will be able to explain
about them?"

"Yes."

"Well, I think I'll spend the morning with him. I've got to make a
speech about pigs, fairly soon."

They did not see Mrs Rattery until luncheon. Tony assumed she was asleep
until she appeared in overalls from the morning-room. "I was down
early," she explained, "and found the men at work stripping the ceiling.
I couldn't resist joining in. I hope you don't mind."

In the afternoon they went to a neighbouring livery stables to look for
hirelings. After tea Tony wrote to Brenda; he had taken to writing
letters in the past few weeks.

    How enjoyable the week-end was [he wrote]. Thank you a thousand
    times for all your sweetness. I wish you were coming down next
    week-end, or that you had been able to stay on a little, but I
    quite understand.

    The Shameless Blonde is not the least what we expected--very
    serene and distant. Not at all like Jock's usual taste. I am
    sure she hasn't any idea where she is or what my name is.

    The work in the morning-room is going on well. The foreman told
    me to-day he thought he would begin on the chromium plating by
    the end of the week. You know what I think about that.

    John can talk of nothing except his hunting to-morrow. I hope he
    doesn't break his neck. Jock and his S.B. are going out too.

Hetton lay near the boundary of three packs; the Pigstanton, who hunted
it, had, in the division of territory, come off with the worst country
and they cherished a permanent resentment about some woods near Bayton.
They were a somewhat ill-tempered lot, contemptuous of each other's
performance, hostile to strangers, torn by internal rancour, united only
in their dislike of the Master. In the case of Colonel Inch this
unpopularity, traditional to the hunt, was quite undeserved; he was a
timid, inconspicuous man who provided the neighbourhood with sport of a
kind at great personal expense. He himself was seldom in sight of hounds
and could often be found in another part of the country morosely
nibbling ginger-nut biscuits in a lane or towards the end of the day
cantering heavily across country, quite lost, a lonely scarlet figure
against the ploughed land, staring about him in the deepening twilight
and shouting at yokels for information. The only pleasure he gained from
his position, but that a substantial one, was in referring to it
casually at Board Meetings of the various companies he directed.

The Pigstanton met twice a week. There was seldom a large field on
Wednesday, but the Hetton meet was popular; it lay in their best country
and the prospect of stirrup-cups had drawn many leathery old ladies from
the neighbouring packs. There were also followers on foot and in every
kind of vehicle, some hanging back diffidently, others, more or less
known to Tony, crowding round the refreshment table. Mr Tendril had a
niece staying with him, who appeared on a motor bicycle.

John stood beside Thunderclap, solemn with excitement. Ben had secured a
powerful, square-headed mare from a neighbouring farmer; he hoped to
have a hunt after John had been taken home; at John's earnest entreaty
nanny was confined indoors, among the housemaids whose heads obtruded at
the upper windows; it was not her day. She had been out of temper while
dressing him. "If I'm in at the death I expect Colonel Inch will blood
me."

"You won't see any death," said nanny.

Now she stood with her eyes at an arrow slit gazing rather resentfully
at the animated scene below. "It's all a lot of nonsense of Ben
Hacket's," she thought. She deplored it all, hounds, Master, field,
huntsman and whippers-in, Mr Tendril's niece in her mackintosh, Jock in
a rat-catcher, Mrs Rattery in tall hat and cutaway coat, oblivious of
the suspicious glances of the subscribers, Tony smiling and chatting to
his guests, the crazy old man with the terriers, the Press photographer,
pretty Miss Ripon in difficulties with a young horse, titupping sideways
over the lawn, the grooms and second horses, the humble, unknown
followers in the background--it was all a lot of nonsense of Ben
Hacket's. "It was after eleven before the child got to sleep last
night," she reflected, "he was that over-excited."

Presently they moved off towards Bruton Wood. The way lay down the south
drive through Compton Last, along the main road for half a mile, and
then through fields. "He can ride with them as far as the covert," Tony
had said.

"Yes, sir, and there'd be no harm in his stayin' a bit to see hounds
working, would there?"

"No, I suppose not."

"And if he breaks away towards home, there'd be no harm in our following
a bit, if we keeps to the lanes and gates, would there, sir?"

"No, but he's not to stay out more than an hour."

"You wouldn't have me take him home with hounds running, would you,
sir?"

"Well, he's got to be in before one."

"I'll see to that, sir. Don't you worry, my beauty," he said to John,
"you'll get a hunt right enough."

They waited until the end of the line of horses and then trotted soberly
behind them. Close at their heels followed the motor-cars, at low gear,
in a fog of exhaust. John was breathless and slightly dizzy. Thunderclap
was tossing her head and worrying at her snaffle. Twice while the field
was moving off she had tried to get away and had taken John round in a
little circle, so that Ben had said, "Hold on to her, son", and had come
up close beside him so as to be able to catch the reins if she looked
like bolting. Once, boring forwards with her head, she took John by
surprise and pulled him forwards out of his balance; he caught hold of
the front of the saddle to steady himself and looked guiltily at Ben.
"I'm afraid I'm riding very badly to-day. D'you think anyone has
noticed?"

"That's all right, son. You can't keep riding-school manners when you're
hunting."

Jock and Mrs Rattery trotted side by side. "I rather like this absurd
horse," she said. She rode astride and it was evident from the moment
she mounted that she rode extremely well.

The members of the Pigstanton noted this with ill-concealed resentment,
for it disturbed their fixed opinion, according to which, while all
fellow members of the hunt were clowns and poltroons, strangers were,
without exception, mannerless lunatics, and a serious menace to anyone
within a quarter of a mile of them.

Half-way through the village Miss Ripon had difficulties in getting past
a stationary baker's van. Her horse plunged and reared, trembling all
over, turning about and slipping frantically over the tarmac. They rode
round her, giving his heels the widest berth, scowling ominously and
grumbling about her. They all knew that horse. Miss Ripon's father had
been trying to sell him all the season, and had lately come down to
eighty pounds. He was a good jumper on occasions but a beast of a horse
to ride. Did Miss Ripon's father really imagine he was improving his
chances of a sale by letting Miss Ripon make an exhibition of herself?
It was like that skinflint, Miss Ripon's father, to risk Miss Ripon's
neck for eighty pounds. And, anyway, Miss Ripon had no business out on
_any_ horse...

Presently she shot past them at a gallop; she was flushed in the face
and her bun was askew; she leant back, pulling with all her weight.
"That girl will come to no good," said Jock.

They encountered her later at the covert. Her horse was sweating and
lathered at the bridle but temporarily at rest, cropping the tufts of
sedge that lay round the woods. Miss Ripon was much out of breath, and
her hands shook as she fiddled with veil, bun and bowler. John rode up
to Jock's side.

"What's happening, Mr Grant-Menzies?"

"Hounds are drawing the covert."

"Oh."

"Are you enjoying yourself?"

"Oh, yes. Thunderclap's terribly fresh. I've never known her like this."

There was a long wait as the horn sounded in the heart of the wood.
Everyone stood in the corner of the big field, near a gate. Everyone,
that is to say, except Miss Ripon, who some minutes ago had disappeared
suddenly, indeed in the middle of a sentence, at full gallop towards
Hetton Hills. After half an hour Jock said, "They're calling hounds
off."

"Does that mean it's a blank?"

"I'm afraid so."

"I hate this happening in _our_ woods," said Ben. "Looks bad."

Indeed the Pigstanton were already beginning to forget their hospitality
and to ask each other what did one expect when Last did not hunt
himself, and to circulate dark reports of how one of the keepers had
been observed last week burying Something late in the evening.

They moved off again, away from Hetton. Ben began to feel his
responsibility. "D'you think I ought to take the young gentleman home,
sir?"

"What did Mr Last say?"

"He said he could go as far as the covert. He didn't say which, sir."

"I'm afraid it sounds as if he ought to go."

"_Oh, Mr Menzies!_"

"Yes, come along, Master John. You've had enough for to-day."

"But I haven't had _any_."

"If you come back in good time to-day your dad will be all the more
willing to let you come out another day."

"But there mayn't _be_ another day. The world may come to an end.
_Please_, Ben. _Please_, Mr Menzies."

"It is a shame they shouldn't have found," said Ben. "He's been looking
forward to it."

"Still, I think Mr Last would want him to go back," said Jock.

So John's fate was decided; hounds went in one direction, he and Ben in
another. John was very near tears as they reached the main road.

"Look," said Ben, to encourage him. "Here comes Miss Ripon on that nappy
bay. Seems as if she's going in, too. Had a fall by the looks of her."

Miss Ripon's hat and back were covered with mud and moss. She had had a
bad twenty minutes after her disappearance. "I'm taking him away," she
said. "I can't do anything with him this morning." She jogged along
beside them towards the village. "I thought perhaps Mr Last would let me
come up to the house and telephone for the car. I don't feel like
hacking him home in his present state. I can't think what's come over
him," she added loyally. "He was out on Saturday. I've never known him
like this before."

"He wants a man up," said Ben.

"Oh, he's no better with the groom, and daddy won't go near him," said
Miss Ripon, stung to indiscretion. "At least... I mean... I don't
think that they'd be any better with him in this state."

He was quiet enough at that moment, keeping pace with the other horses.
They rode abreast, she on the outside with John's pony between her and
Ben.

Then this happened: they reached a turn in the road and came face to
face with one of the single-decker country buses that covered that
neighbourhood. It was not going fast and, seeing the horses, the driver
slowed down still further and drew into the side. Mr Tendril's niece,
who had also despaired of the day's sport, was following behind them at
a short distance on her motor bicycle; she too slowed down, and,
observing that Miss Ripon's horse was likely to be difficult, stopped.

Ben said, "Let me go first, Miss. He'll follow. Don't hold too hard on
his mouth and just give him a tap."

Miss Ripon did as she was told; everyone in fact behaved with complete
good sense.

They drew abreast of the omnibus. Miss Ripon's horse did not like it,
but it seemed as though he would get by. The passengers watched with
amusement. At that moment the motor bicycle, running gently in neutral
gear, fired back into the cylinder with a sharp detonation.

For a second Miss Ripon's horse stood rigid with alarm; then, menaced in
front and behind, he did what was natural to him and shied sideways,
cannoning violently into the pony at his side. John was knocked from the
saddle and fell on the road while Miss Ripon's bay, rearing and
skidding, continued to plunge away from the bus.

"Take a hold of him, Miss. Use your whip," shouted Ben.

"The boy's down."

She hit him and the horse collected himself and bolted up the road into
the village, but before he went one of his heels struck out and sent
John into the ditch, where he lay bent double, perfectly still.

Everyone agreed that it was nobody's fault.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was nearly an hour before the news reached Jock and Mrs Rattery where
they were waiting beside another blank covert. Colonel Inch stopped
hunting for the day and sent the hounds back to the kennels. The voices
were hushed which, five minutes before, had been proclaiming that they
knew it for a fact, Last had given orders to shoot every fox on the
place. Later, after their baths, they made up for it in criticism of
Miss Ripon's father, but at the moment everyone was shocked and silent.
Someone lent Jock and Mrs Rattery a car to get home in, and a groom to
see to the hirelings.

"It's the most appalling thing," said Jock in the borrowed car. "What on
earth are we going to say to Tony?"

"I'm the last person to have about on an occasion like this," said Mrs
Rattery.

They passed the scene of the accident; there were still people hanging
about, talking.

There were people hanging about, talking in the hall at the house. The
doctor was buttoning up his coat, just going.

"Killed instantly," he said. "Took it full on the base of the skull.
Very sad, awfully fond of the kid. No one to blame, though."

Nanny was there in tears, also Mr Tendril and his niece; a policeman and
Ben and two men who had helped bring up the body were in the servants'
hall. "It wasn't the kid's fault," said Ben.

"It wasn't anyone's fault," they said.

"He'd had a lousy day, too, poor little bastard," said Ben.

"If it was anyone's fault it was Mr Grant-Menzies making him go in."

"It wasn't anyone's fault," they said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Tony was alone in the library. The first thing he said, when Jock came
in, was, "We've got to tell Brenda."

"D'you know where to get her?"

"She's probably at that school... But we can't tell her over the
telephone... Anyway, Ambrose has tried there and the flat but he can't
get through... What on earth are we going to say to her?"

Jock was silent. He stood in the fireplace with his hands in the pockets
of his breeches, with his back to Tony. Presently Tony said, "You
weren't anywhere near, were you?"

"No, we'd gone on to another covert."

"That niece of Mr Tendril's told me first... then we met them coming
up, and Ben told me all that happened... It's awful for the girl."

"Miss Ripon?"

"Yes, she's just left... she had a nasty fall too, just after. Her
horse slipped up in the village... she was in a terrible state, poor
child, what with that and... John. She didn't know she'd hurt him until
quite a time afterwards... she was in the chemist's shop having a
bandage put on her head, when they told her. She cut it falling. She was
in a terrible state. I sent her back in the car... it wasn't her
fault."

"No, it wasn't anybody's fault. It just happened."

"That's it," said Tony. "It just happened... how are we going to tell
Brenda?"

"One of us will have to go up."

"Yes... I think I shall have to stay here. I don't know why really,
but there will be things to see to. It's an awful thing to ask anyone
to do..."

"I'll go," said Jock.

"There'll be things to see to there... there's got to be an inquest the
doctor says. It's purely formal, of course, but it will be ghastly for
that Ripon girl. She'll have to give evidence... she was in a terrible
state. I hope I was all right to her. They'd just brought John in and I
was rather muddled. She looked awful. I believe her father's bloody to
her... I wish Brenda had been here. She's so good with everyone. I get
in a muddle."

The two men stood in silence. Tony said, "Can you really face going up
and seeing Brenda?"

"Yes, I'll go," said Jock.

Presently Mrs Rattery came in. "Colonel Inch has been here," she said.
"I talked to him. He wanted to give you his sympathy."

"Is he still here?"

"No, I told him you'd probably prefer to be left alone. He thought you'd
be glad to hear he stopped the hunt."

"Nice of him to come... Were you having a good day?"

"No."

"I'm sorry. We saw a fox in Bruton Wood last week. John and I... Jock's
going up to London to fetch Brenda."

"I'll take him in the aeroplane. It'll be quicker."

"Yes, that will be quicker."

"I'll go and change now. I won't be ten minutes."

"I'll change, too," said Jock.

When he was alone Tony rang the bell. A young footman answered; he was
quite young and had not been long at Hetton.

"Will you tell Mr Ambrose that Mrs Rattery is leaving to-day. She is
flying up with Mr Grant-Menzies. Her ladyship will probably be coming by
the evening train."

"Very good, sir."

"They had better have some luncheon before they go. I will have it with
them... And will you put a call through to Colonel Inch and thank him
for coming? Say I will write. And to Mr Ripon's to enquire how Miss
Ripon is? And to the vicarage and ask Mr Tendril if I can see him this
evening? He's not here still?"

"No, sir, he left a few minutes ago."

"Tell him I shall have to discuss arrangements with him."

"Very good, sir."

Mr Last was very matter of fact about everything, the footman reported
later.

It was perfectly quiet in the library, for the workmen in the
morning-room had laid aside their tools for the day.

Mrs Rattery was ready first.

"They're just getting luncheon."

"We shan't want any," she said. "You forget we were going hunting."

"Better have something," said Tony, and then, "It's awful for Jock,
having to tell Brenda. I wonder how long it will be before she arrives."

There was something in Tony's voice as he said this which made Mrs
Rattery ask, "What are you going to do while you're waiting?"

"I don't know. I suppose there will be things to see to."

"Look here," said Mrs Rattery, "Jock had better go up by car. I'll stay
here until Lady Brenda comes."

"It would be awful for you."

"No, I'll stay."

Tony said, "I suppose it's ridiculous of me, but I wish you would... I
mean, won't it be awful for you? I am all in a muddle. It's so hard to
believe yet that it really happened."

"It happened all right."

The footman came to say that Mr Tendril would call after tea that day;
that Miss Ripon had gone straight to bed and was asleep.

"Mr Grant-Menzies is going up in his car. He may be back to-night," said
Tony. "Mrs Rattery is waiting until her ladyship arrives."

"Very good, sir. And Colonel Inch wanted to know whether you would care
to have the huntsmen blow "Gone to ground" at the funeral."

"Say that I'll write to him," and, when the footman had left the room,
Tony said, "An atrocious suggestion."

"Oh, I don't know. He's very anxious to be helpful."

"They don't like him much as Master."

Jock left soon after half-past two. Tony and Mrs Rattery had coffee in
the library.

"I'm afraid this is a very difficult situation," said Tony. "After all
we scarcely know each other."

"You don't have to think about me."

"But it must be awful for you."

"And you must stop thinking that."

"I'll try... the absurd thing is that I'm not thinking it, just saying
it... I keep thinking of other things all the time."

"I know. You don't have to say anything."

Presently Tony said, "It's going to be so much worse for Brenda. You see
she'd got nothing else, much, except John. I've got her, and I love the
house... but with Brenda John always came first... naturally... And
then you know she's seen so little of John lately. She's been in London
such a lot. I'm afraid that's going to hurt her."

"You can't ever tell what's going to hurt people."

"But, you see, I know Brenda so well."


[VI]

The library windows were open and the clock, striking the hour, high
over head among its crockets and finials, was clearly audible in the
quiet room. It was some time since they had spoken. Mrs Rattery sat with
her back to Tony; she had spread out her intricate four-pack patience on
a card table; he was in front of the fire, in the chair he had taken
after lunch.

"Only four o'clock?" he said.

"I thought you were asleep."

"No, just thinking... Jock will be more than half-way there by now,
about Aylesbury or Tring."

"It's a slow way to travel."

"It's less than four hours ago that it happened... it's odd to think
that this is the same day; that it's only five hours ago they were all
here at the meet having drinks." There was a pause in which Mrs Rattery
swept up the cards and began to deal them again. "It was twenty-eight
minutes past twelve when I heard. I looked at my watch... It was ten to
one when they brought John in... just over three hours ago... It's
almost incredible, isn't it, everything becoming absolutely different,
suddenly like that?"

"It's always that way," said Mrs Rattery.

"Brenda will hear in an hour now... if Jock finds her in. Of course she
may very likely be out. He won't know where to find her, because there's
no one else in the flat. She leaves it locked up, empty, when she goes
out... and she's out half the day. I know because I sometimes ring up
and can't get an answer. He may not find her for hours... It may be as
long again as the time since it happened. That would only make it eight
o'clock. It's quite likely she won't come in until eight... Think of
it, all the time between now and when it happened, before Brenda hears.
It's scarcely credible, is it? And then she's got to get down here.
There's a train that leaves at nine something. She might get that. I
wonder if I ought to have gone up too... I didn't like to leave John."

(Mrs Rattery sat intent over her game, moving little groups of cards
adroitly backwards and forwards about the table like shuttles across a
loom; under her fingers order grew out of chaos; she established
sequence and precedence; the symbols before her became coherent,
interrelated.)

"...Of course she may be at home when he arrives. In that case she can
get the evening train she used always to come by, when she went to
London for the day, before she got the flat... I'm trying to see it
all, as it's going to happen, Jock coming and her surprise at seeing
him, and then his telling her... It's awful for Jock... She may know
at half-past five or a bit earlier."

"It's a pity you don't play patience," said Mrs Rattery.

"In a way I shall feel happier when she knows... it feels all wrong as
it is at present, having it as a secret that Brenda doesn't know... I'm
not sure how she fits in her day. I suppose her last lecture is over at
about five... I wonder if she goes home first to change if she's going
out to tea or cocktails. She can't sit about much in the flat, it's so
small."

Mrs Rattery brooded over her chequer of cards and then drew them towards
her into a heap, haphazard once more and without meaning; it had nearly
come to a solution that time, but for a six of diamonds out of place,
and a stubbornly congested patch at one corner, where nothing could be
made to move. "It's a heart-breaking game," she said.

The clock struck again.

"Is that only a quarter-past?... You know, I think I should have gone
off my head if I were alone. It's nice of you to stay with me."

"Do you play bezique?"

"I'm afraid not."

"Or piquet?"

"No. I've never been able to learn any card game except animal snap."

"Pity."

"There's Marjorie and several people I ought to wire to, but I'd better
wait until I know that Jock has seen Brenda. Suppose she was with
Marjorie when the telegram arrived."

"You've got to try and stop thinking about things. Can you throw craps?"

"No."

"That's easy; I'll show you. There'll be some dice in the backgammon
board."

"I'm all right, really. I'd sooner not play."

"You get the dice and sit up here at the table. We've got six hours to
get through."

She showed him how to throw craps. He said, "I've seen it on the
cinema--pullman porters and taxi men."

"Of course you have, it's easy... there you see you've won, you take
all."

Presently Tony said, "I've just thought of something."

"Don't you ever take a rest from thinking?"

"Suppose the evening papers have got hold of it already. Brenda may
see it on a placard, or just pick up a paper casually and there it
will be... perhaps with a photograph."

"Yes, I thought of that just now, when you were talking about
telegraphing."

"But it's quite likely, isn't it? They get hold of everything so
quickly. What can we do about it?"

"There isn't anything we can do. We've just got to wait... Come on,
boy, throw up."

"I don't want to play any more. I'm worried."

"I know you're worried. You don't have to tell me... you aren't going
to give up playing just when the luck's running your way?"

"I'm sorry... it isn't any good."

He walked about the room, first to the window, then to the fireplace. He
began to fill his pipe. "At least we can find out whether the evening
papers have got it in. We can ring up and ask the hall porter at my
club."

"That's not going to prevent your wife reading it. We've just got to
wait. What was the game you said you knew? Animal something?"

"Snap."

"I'll buy it."

"It's just a child's game. It would be ridiculous with two."

"Show me."

"Well each of us chooses an animal."

"All right, I'm a dog and you're a hen. Now what?"

Tony explained.

"I'd say it was one of those games that you have to feel pretty good
first, before you can enjoy them," said Mrs Rattery. "But I'll try
anything."

They each took a pack and began dealing. Soon a pair of eights appeared.
"Bow-wow," said Mrs Rattery, scooping in the cards.

Another pair, "Bow-wow," said Mrs Rattery. "You know you aren't putting
your heart into this."

"Oh," said Tony. "Coop-coop-coop."

Presently he said again, "Coop-coop-coop."

"Don't be dumb," said Mrs Rattery, "that isn't a pair..."

They were still playing when Albert came in to draw the curtains. Tony
had only two cards left which he turned over regularly; Mrs Rattery was
obliged to divide hers, they were too many to hold. They stopped playing
when they found that Albert was in the room.

"What must that man have thought?" said Tony, when he had gone out.

("Sitting there clucking like a 'en," Albert reported, "and the little
fellow lying dead upstairs.")

"We'd better stop."

"It wasn't a very good game. And to think it's the only one you know."

She collected the cards and began to deal them into their proper packs.
Ambrose and Albert brought in tea. Tony looked at his watch. "Five
o'clock. Now that the shutters are up we shan't hear the chimes. Jock
must be in London by now."

Mrs Rattery said, "I'd rather like some whisky."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Jock had not seen Brenda's flat. It was in a large, featureless house,
typical of the district. Mrs Beaver deplored the space wasted by the
well staircase and empty, paved hall. There was no porter; a woman came
three mornings a week with bucket and mop. A board painted with the
names of the tenants informed Jock that Brenda was IN. But he put little
reliance on this information, knowing that Brenda was not one to
remember, as she came in and out, to change the indicator. He found her
front door on the second floor. After the first flight the staircase
changed from marble to a faded carpet that had been there before Mrs
Beaver undertook the reconstruction. Jock pressed the bell and heard it
ringing just inside the door. Nobody came to open it. It was past five,
and he had not expected to find Brenda at home. He had decided on the
road up that after trying the flat, he would go to his club and ring up
various friends of Brenda's who might know where she was. He rang again,
from habit, and waited a little; then turned to go. But at that moment
the door next to Brenda's opened and a dark lady in a dress of crimson
velvet looked out at him; she wore very large earrings of oriental
filigree, set with bosses of opaque, valueless stone.

"Are you looking for Lady Brenda Last?"

"I am. Is she a friend of yours?"

"Oh, _such_ a friend," said Princess Abdul Akbar.

"Then perhaps you can tell me where I can find her?"

"I think she's bound to be at Lady Cockpurse's. I'm just going there
myself. Can I give her any message?"

"I had better come and see her."

"Well, wait five minutes and you can go with me. Come inside."

The Princess's single room was furnished promiscuously and with truly
Eastern disregard of the right properties of things; swords meant to
adorn the state robes of a Moorish caid were swung from the picture
rail; mats made for prayer were strewn on the divan; the carpet on the
floor had been made in Bokhara as a wall covering; while over the
dressing table was draped a shawl made in Yokohama for sale to
cruise-passengers; an octagonal table from Port Said held a Tibetan
Buddha of pale soapstone; six ivory elephants from Bombay stood along
the top of the radiator. Other cultures, too, were represented by a set
of Lalique bottles and powder boxes, a phallic fetish from Senegal, a
Dutch copper bowl, a waste-paper basket made of varnished aquatint, a
golliwog presented at the gala dinner of a seaside hotel, a dozen or so
framed photographs of the Princess, a garden scene ingeniously
constructed in pieces of coloured wood, and a radio set in fumed oak,
Tudor style. In so small a room the effect was distracting. The Princess
sat at the looking-glass, Jock behind her on the divan.

"What's your name?" she asked over her shoulder. He told her. "Oh yes,
I've heard them mention you. I was at Hetton the week-end before last...
such a quaint old place."

"I'd better tell you. There's been a frightful accident there this
morning."

Jenny Abdul Akbar spun round on the leather stool; her eyes were wide
with alarm, her hand pressed to her heart.

"Quick," she whispered, "_tell me_. I can't bear it. Is it _death_?"

Jock nodded. "Their little boy... kicked by a horse."

"_Little Jimmy._"

"John."

"John... _dead_. It's _too_ horrible."

"It wasn't anybody's fault."

"Oh yes," said Jenny. "It was. It was _my_ fault. I ought never to have
gone there... a terrible curse hangs over me. Wherever I go I bring
nothing but sorrow... if only it was _I_ that was dead... I shall
never be able to face them again. I feel like a murderess... that brave
little life snuffed out."

"I say, you know, really, I shouldn't take that line about it."

"It isn't the first time it's happened... always, anywhere, I am hunted
down... without remorse. O God," said Jenny Abdul Akbar. "What have I
done to deserve it?"

She rose to leave him; there was nowhere she could go except the
bathroom. Jock said, through the door, "Well, I must go along to Polly's
and see Brenda."

"Wait a minute and I'll come too." She had brightened a little when she
emerged. "Have you got a car here," she asked, "or shall I ring up a
taxi?"

                 *        *        *        *        *

After tea Mr Tendril called. Tony saw him in his study and was away half
an hour. When he returned he went to the tray, which, on Mrs Rattery's
instructions, had been left in the library, and poured himself out
whisky and ginger ale. Mrs Rattery had resumed her patience. "Bad
interview?" she asked, without looking up.

"Awful." He drank the whisky quickly and poured out some more.

"Bring me one too, will you?"

Tony said, "I only wanted to see him about arrangements. He tried to be
comforting. It was very painful... after all the last thing one wants
to talk about at a time like this is religion."

"Some like it," said Mrs Rattery.

"Of course," Tony began, after a pause, "when you haven't got children
yourself--"

"I've got two sons," said Mrs Rattery.

"Have you? I'm so sorry. I didn't realize... we know each other so
little. How very impertinent of me."

"That's all right. People are always surprised. I don't see them often.
They're at school somewhere. I took them to the cinema last summer.
They're getting quite big. One's going to be good-looking, I think. His
father is."

"Quarter-past six," said Tony. "He's bound to have told her by now."

                 *        *        *        *        *

There was a little party at Lady Cockpurse's, Veronica and Daisy and
Sybil, Souki de Foucald-Esterhazy, and four or five others, all women.
They were there to consult a new fortune-teller called Mrs Northcote.
Mrs Beaver had discovered her and for every five guineas that she earned
at her introduction Mrs Beaver took a commission of two pounds twelve
and sixpence. She told fortunes in a new way, by reading the soles of
the feet. They waited their turn impatiently. "What a time she is taking
over Daisy."

"She is very thorough," said Polly, "and it tickles rather."

Presently Daisy emerged. "What was she like?" they asked.

"I mustn't tell or it spoils it all," said Daisy.

They had dealt cards for precedence. It was Brenda's turn now. She went
next door to Mrs Northcote, who was sitting at a stool beside an
armchair. She was a dowdy, middle-aged woman with a slightly genteel
accent. Brenda sat down and took off her shoe and stocking. Mrs
Northcote laid the foot on her knee and gazed at it with great
solemnity; then she picked it up and began tracing the small creases of
the sole with the point of a silver pencil case. Brenda wriggled her
toes luxuriously and settled down to listen.

Next door they said, "Where's Mr Beaver to-day?"

"He's flown over to France with his mother to see some new wallpapers.
She's been worrying all day thinking he's had an accident."

"It's all very touching, isn't it? Though I can't see his point
myself..."

"You must never do anything on Thursdays," said Mrs Northcote.

"Nothing?"

"Nothing important. You are intellectual, imaginative, sympathetic,
easily led by others, impulsive, affectionate. You are highly artistic
and are not giving full scope to your capabilities."

"Isn't there anything about love?"

"I am coming to love. All these lines from the great toe to the instep
represent lovers."

"Yes, go on some more about that..."

Princess Abdul Akbar was announced. "Where's Brenda?" she said. "I
thought she'd be here."

"Mrs Northcote's doing her now."

"Jock Menzies wants to see her. He's downstairs."

"Darling Jock... Why on earth didn't you bring him up?"

"No, it's something terribly important. He's got to see Brenda alone."

"My dear, how mysterious. Well, she won't be long now. We can't disturb
them. It would upset Mrs Northcote."

Jenny told them the news.

On the other side of the door, Brenda's leg was beginning to feel
slightly chilly. "Four men dominate your fate," Mrs Northcote was
saying, "one is loyal and tender but he has not yet disclosed his love,
one is passionate and overpowering, you are a little afraid of him."

"Dear me," said Brenda. "How very exciting. Who _can_ they be?"

"One you must avoid; he bodes no good for you, he is steely hearted and
rapacious."

"I bet that's my Mr Beaver, bless him."

Downstairs Jock was waiting in the small front room where Polly's guests
usually assembled before luncheon. It was five past six.

Soon Brenda pulled on her stocking, stepped into her shoe and joined the
ladies. "_Most_ enjoyable," she pronounced. "Why, how odd you all look."

"Jock Grant-Menzies wants to see you downstairs."

"Jock? How very extraordinary. It isn't anything awful, is it?"

"You'd better go and see him."

Suddenly Brenda became frightened by the strange air of the room and the
unfamiliar expression in her friends' faces. She ran downstairs to the
room where Jock was waiting.

"What is it, Jock? Tell me quickly, I'm scared. It's nothing awful, is
it?"

"I'm afraid it is. There's been a very serious accident."

"John?"

"Yes."

"Dead?"

He nodded.

She sat down on a hard little Empire chair against the wall, perfectly
still with her hands folded in her lap, like a small well-brought-up
child introduced into a room full of grown-ups. She said, "Tell me what
happened. Why do you know about it first?"

"I've been down at Hetton since the week-end."

"Hetton?"

"Don't you remember? John was going hunting to-day."

She frowned, not at once taking in what he was saying. "John... John
Andrew... I... oh, thank God..." Then she burst into tears.

She wept helplessly, turning round in the chair and pressing her
forehead against its gilt back.

Upstairs Mrs Northcote had Souki Foucauld-Esterhazy by the foot and was
saying, "There are four men dominating your fate. One is loyal and
tender but has not yet disclosed his love..."


[VII]

In the silence of Hetton, the telephone rang near the housekeeper's room
and was switched through to the library. Tony answered it.

"This is Jock speaking. I've just seen Brenda. She's coming down by the
seven o'clock train."

"Is she terribly upset?"

"Yes, naturally."

"Where is she now?"

"She's with me. I'm speaking from Polly's."

"Shall I talk to her?"

"Better not."

"All right... I'll meet that train. Are you coming too?"

"No."

"Well, you've been wonderful. I don't know what I should have done
without you and Mrs Rattery."

"Oh, that's all right. I'll see Brenda off."

She had stopped crying and sat crouched in the chair. She did not look
up while Jock telephoned. Then she said, "Yes, I'll go by that train."

"We ought to start. I suppose you will have to get some things from the
flat."

"My bag... upstairs. You get it. I can't go in there again."

She did not speak on her way to her flat. She sat beside Jock as he
drove, looking straight ahead. When they arrived she unlocked her door
and led him in. The room was extremely empty of furniture. She sat down
in the only chair. "There's plenty of time really. Tell me exactly what
happened."

Jock told her.

"Poor little boy," she said. "Poor little boy."

Then she opened her cupboard and began to put a few things into a
suitcase; she went in and out from the bathroom once or twice. "That's
everything," she said. "There's still too much time."

"Would you like anything to eat?"

"Oh no, nothing to eat." She sat down again and looked at herself in the
glass. She did not attempt to do anything to her face. "When you first
told me," she said. "I didn't understand. I didn't know what I was
saying."

"I know."

"I didn't say anything, did I?"

"You know what you said."

"Yes, I know... I didn't mean... I don't think it's any good trying to
explain."

Jock said, "Are you sure you've got everything?"

"Yes, that's everything," she nodded towards the little case on the bed.
She looked quite hopeless.

"Well, we'd better go to the station."

"All right. It's early. But it doesn't matter."

Jock took her to the train. As it was Wednesday the carriages were full
of women returning after their day's shopping.

"Why not go first-class?"

"No, no. I always go third."

She sat in the middle of a row. The women on either side looked at her
curiously, wondering if she were ill.

"Don't you want anything to read?"

"Nothing to read."

"Or eat?"

"Or eat."

"Then I'll say good-bye."

"Good-bye."

Another woman pushed past Jock into the carriage, laden with light
parcels.

                 *        *        *        *        *

When the news became known, Marjorie said to Allan, "Well, anyway, this
will mean the end of Mr Beaver."

But Polly Cockpurse said to Veronica, "That's the end of Tony so far as
Brenda is concerned."

The impoverished Lasts were stunned by the telegram. They lived on an
extensive but unprofitable chicken farm near Princes Risborough. It did
not enter the heads of any of them that now, if anything happened, they
were the heirs to Hetton. Had it done so, their grief would have been
just as keen.

Jock drove from Paddington to Bratt's. One of the men by the bar said,
"Ghastly thing about Tony Last's boy."

"Yes, I was there."

"No, were you? What a ghastly thing."

Later a telephone message came: "Princess Abdul Akbar wishes to know
whether you are in the club."

"No, no, tell her I'm not here," said Jock.


[VIII]

The inquest was held at eleven o'clock next morning; it was soon over.
The doctor, the bus-driver, Ben and Miss Ripon gave evidence. Miss Ripon
was allowed to remain seated. She was very white and spoke in a
trembling voice; her father glared at her from a nearby seat; under her
hat was a small bare patch, where they had shaved off her hair to clean
her cut. In his summary the coroner remarked that it was clear from the
evidence that nobody was in any way to blame for the misadventure; it
only remained to express the deep sympathy of the court to Mr Last and
Lady Brenda in their terrible loss. The people fell back to allow Tony
and Brenda to leave the room. Colonel Inch and the hunt secretary were
both present. Everything was done with delicacy and to show respect for
their sorrow.

Brenda said, "Wait a minute. I must just speak to that poor Ripon girl."

She did it charmingly. When everyone had gone. Tony said, "I wish you
had been here yesterday. There were so many people about and I didn't
know what to say to them."

"What did you do all day?"

"There was the Shameless Blonde... we played animal snap some of the
time."

"Animal snap? Was that any good?"

"Not much... It's odd to think that yesterday this time it hadn't
happened."

"Poor little boy," said Brenda.

They had scarcely spoken to each other since Brenda's arrival. Tony had
driven to the station to meet her; by the time they reached the house
Mrs Rattery had gone to bed; that morning she left in her aeroplane
without seeing either of them. They heard the machine pass over the
house, Brenda in her bath, Tony downstairs in his study attending to the
correspondence that had become necessary.

A day of fitful sunshine and blustering wind; white and grey clouds were
scarcely moving, high overhead, but the bare trees round the house
swayed and shook and there were swift whirlpools of straw in the stable
yard. Ben changed from the Sunday suit he had worn at the inquest and
went about his duties. Thunderclap, too, had been kicked yesterday and
was very slightly lame in the off fore.

Brenda took off her hat and threw it down on a chair in the hall.
"Nothing to say, is there?"

"There's no need to talk."

"No. I suppose there'll have to be a funeral."

"Well, of course."

"Yes: to-morrow?"

She looked into the morning-room. "They've done quite a lot, haven't
they?"

All Brenda's movements were slower than usual and her voice was flat and
expressionless. She sank down into one of the armchairs in the centre of
the hall, which nobody ever used. She sat there doing nothing. Tony put
his hand on her shoulder but she said "Don't", not impatiently or
nervously but without any expression. Tony said, "I'll go and finish
those letters."

"Yes."

"See you at luncheon."

"Yes."

She rose, looked round listlessly for her hat, found it and went very
slowly upstairs, the sunlight through the stained-glass windows glowing
and sparkling all about her.

In her room she sat on the window seat, looking out across the meadows
and dun ploughland, the naked tossing trees, the church towers, the
maelstroms of dust and leaf which eddied about the terrace below; she
still held her hat and fidgeted with her fingers on the brooch which was
clipped to one side of it.

Nanny knocked at the door and came in, red eyed. "If you please, my
lady, I've been going through John's things. There's this handkerchief
doesn't belong to him."

The heavy scent and crowned cipher at the corner proclaimed its origin.

"I know whose it is. I'll send it back to her."

"Can't think how it came to be there," said nanny.

"Poor little boy. Poor little boy," said Brenda to herself, when nanny
had left her, and gazed out across the troubled landscape.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"I was thinking about the pony, sir."

"Oh yes, Ben?"

"Will you want to be keeping her now?"

"I hadn't thought... no, I suppose not."

"Mr Westmacott over at Restall was asking about her. He thought she
might do for his little girl."

"Yes."

"How much shall we be asking?"

"Oh, I don't know... whatever you think is right."

"She's a good little pony and she's always been treated well. I don't
think she ought to go under twenty-five quid, sir."

"All right, Ben, you see about it."

"I'll ask thirty, shall I, sir, and come down a bit?"

"Do just what you think best."

"Very good, sir."

                 *        *        *        *        *

At luncheon Tony said, "Jock rang up. He wanted to know if there was
anything he could do."

"How sweet of him. Why don't you have him down for the week-end?"

"Would you like that?"

"I shan't be here. I'm going to Veronica's."

"You're going to Veronica's?"

"Yes, don't you remember?"

There were servants in the room so that they said nothing more until
later, when they were alone in the library. Then, "Are you really going
away?"

"Yes. I can't stay here. You understand that, don't you?"

"Yes, of course. I was thinking we might both go away, abroad
somewhere."

Brenda did not answer him but continued in her own line. "I couldn't
stay here. It's all over, don't you see, our life down here."

"Darling, what _do_ you mean?"

"Don't ask me to explain... not just now."

"But, Brenda, sweet, I don't understand. We're both young. Of course, we
can never forget John. He'll always be our eldest son, but..."

"Don't go on, Tony, please don't go on."

So Tony stopped and after a time said, "So you're going to Veronica's
to-morrow?"

"Mmmm."

"I think I will ask Jock to come."

"Yes, I should."

"And we can think about plans later when we've got more used to things."

"Yes, later."

Next morning.

"A sweet letter from mother," said Brenda, handing it across. Lady St
Cloud had written:

    ...I shall not come down to Hetton for the funeral, but I shall
    be thinking of you both all the time and of my dear grandson. I
    shall think of you as I saw you all three, together, at
    Christmas. Dear children, at a time like this only yourselves
    can be any help to each other. Love is the only thing that is
    stronger than sorrow...

"I got a telegram from Jock," said Tony, "he _can_ come."

"It's really rather embarrassing for us all, Brenda coming," said
Veronica. "I do think she might have chucked. I shan't in the least know
what to say to her."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Tony said to Jock, as they sat alone after dinner, "I've been trying to
understand, and I think I do now. It's not how I feel myself, but Brenda
and I are quite different in lots of ways. It's _because_ they were
strangers and didn't know John, and were never in our life here, that
she wants to be with them. That's it, don't you think? She wants to be
absolutely alone and away from everything that reminds her of what has
happened... all the same I feel awful about letting her go. I can't
tell you what she was like here... quite mechanical. It's so much worse
for her than it is for me, I see that. It's so terrible not being able
to do anything to help."

Jock did not answer.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Beaver was staying at Veronica's. Brenda said to him, "Until Wednesday,
when I thought something had happened to you, I had no idea that I loved
you."

"Well you've said it often enough."

"I'm going to make you understand," said Brenda. "You clod."

                 *        *        *        *        *

On Monday morning Tony found this letter on his breakfast tray.

    Darling Tony,

    I am not coming back to Hetton. Grimshawe can pack everything
    and bring it to the flat. Then I shan't want her any more.

    You must have realized for some time that things were going
    wrong.

    I am in love with John Beaver and I want to have a divorce and
    marry him. If John Andrew had not died things might not have
    happened like this. I can't tell. As it is, I simply can't begin
    over again. Please do not mind too much. I suppose we shan't be
    allowed to meet while the case is on but I hope afterwards we
    shall be great friends. Anyway, I shall always look on you as
    one whatever you think of me.

    Best love from
    Brenda.

When Tony read this his first thought was that Brenda had lost her
reason. "She's only seen Beaver twice to my knowledge," he said.

But later he showed the letter to Jock, who said, "I'm sorry it should
have happened like this."

"But it's not true, is it?"

"Yes, I'm afraid it is. Everyone has known for some time."

But it was several days before Tony fully realized what it meant. He had
got into a habit of loving and trusting Brenda.




CHAPTER IV
ENGLISH GOTHIC--II


[I]

"How's the old boy taking it?"

"Not so well. It makes me feel rather a beast," said Brenda. "I'm afraid
he minds a lot."

"Well, you wouldn't like it if he didn't," said Polly to console her.

"No, I suppose not."

"I shall stick by you whatever happens," said Jenny Abdul Akbar.

"Oh, everything is going quite smoothly now," said Brenda. "There was a
certain amount of _g?ne_ with relatives."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Tony had been living with Jock for the last three weeks. Mrs Rattery had
gone to California and he was grateful for company. They dined together
most evenings. They had given up going to Bratt's; so had Beaver; they
were afraid of meeting each other. Instead, Tony and Jock went to
Brown's, where Beaver was not a member. Beaver was continually with
Brenda nowadays, at one of half a dozen houses.

Mrs Beaver did not like the turn things had taken; her workmen had been
sent back from Hetton with their job unfinished.

                 *        *        *        *        *

In the first week Tony had had several distasteful interviews. Allan had
attempted to act as peacemaker.

"You just wait a few weeks," he had said. "Brenda will come back. She'll
soon get sick of Beaver."

"But I don't want her back."

"I know just how you feel, but it doesn't do to be medieval about it. If
Brenda hadn't been upset at John's death this need never have come to a
crisis. Why, last year Marjorie was going everywhere with that ass Robin
Beaseley. She was mad about him at the time, but I pretended not to
notice and it all blew over. If I were you I should refuse to recognize
that anything has happened."

Marjorie had said, "Of _course_ Brenda doesn't love Beaver. How could
she?... And if she thinks she does at the moment, it's your duty to
prevent her making a fool of herself. You must refuse to be
divorced--anyway, until she has found someone more reasonable."

Lady St Cloud had said, "Brenda has been very, very foolish. She always
was an excitable girl, but I am sure there was never anything _wrong_,
quite sure. _That_ wouldn't be like Brenda at all. I haven't met Mr
Beaver and I do not wish to. I understand he is unsuitable in every way.
Brenda would never want to marry anyone like that. I will tell you
exactly how it happened, Tony. Brenda must have felt a tiny bit
neglected--people often do at that stage of marriage. I have known
countless cases--and it was naturally flattering to find a young man to
beg and carry for her. That's all it was, nothing _wrong_. And then the
terrible shock of little John's accident unsettled her and she didn't
know what she was saying or writing. You'll both laugh over this little
fracas in years to come."

Tony had not set eyes on Brenda since the afternoon of the funeral. Once
he spoke to her over the telephone.

It was during the second week when he was feeling most lonely and
bewildered by various counsels. Allan had been with him urging a
reconciliation. "I've been talking to Brenda," he had said. "She's sick
of Beaver already. The one thing she wants is to go back to Hetton and
settle down with you again."

While Allan was there, Tony resolutely refused to listen, but later the
words, and the picture they evoked, would not leave his mind. So he rang
her up and she answered him calmly and gravely.

"Brenda, this is Tony."

"Hullo, Tony, what is it?"

"I've been talking to Allan. He's just told me about your change of
mind."

"I'm not sure I know what you mean."

"That you want to leave Beaver and come back to Hetton."

"Did Allan say that?"

"Yes; isn't it true?"

"I'm afraid it's not. Allan is an interfering ass. I had him here this
afternoon. He told me that you didn't want a divorce but that you were
willing to let me stay on alone in London and do as I liked provided
there was no public scandal. It seemed a good idea and I was going to
ring you up about it. But I suppose that's just his diplomacy too.
Anyway, I'm afraid there's no prospect of my coming back to Hetton just
at present."

"Oh, I see. I didn't think it was likely... I just rang you up."

"That's all right. How are you, Tony?"

"All right, thanks."

"Good, so am I. Good-bye."

That was all he had heard of her. Both avoided places where there was a
likelihood of their meeting.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was thought convenient that Brenda should appear as the plaintiff.
Tony did not employ the family solicitors in the matter but another less
reputable firm who specialized in divorce. He had steeled himself to
expect a certain professional gusto, even levity, but found them instead
disposed to melancholy and suspicion.

"I gather Lady Brenda is being far from discreet. It is quite likely
that the King's Proctor may intervene... Moreover, there is the
question of money. You understand that by the present arrangement since
she is the innocent and injured party she will be entitled to claim
substantial alimony from the courts?"

"Oh, that's all right," said Tony. "I've been into all that with her
brother-in-law and have decided to make a settlement of five hundred a
year. She has four hundred of her own and I understand Mr Beaver has
something."

"It's a pity we can't put it in writing," said the solicitor, "but that
might constitute Conspiracy."

"Lady Brenda's word is quite good enough," said Tony.

"We like to protect our clients against even the most remote
contingencies," said the lawyer with an air of piety, for he had not had
Tony's opportunities to contract the habit of loving and trusting
Brenda.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The fourth week-end after Brenda's departure from Hetton was fixed for
Tony's infidelity. A suite was engaged at a seaside hotel ("We always
send our clients there. The servants are well accustomed to giving
evidence") and private detectives were notified. "It only remains to
select a partner," said the solicitor; no hint of naughtiness lightened
his gloom. "We have on occasions been instrumental in accommodating our
clients but there have been frequent complaints, so we find it best to
leave the choice to them. Lately we had a particularly delicate case
involving a man of very rigid morality and a certain diffidence. In the
end his own wife consented to go with him and supply the evidence. She
wore a red wig. It was quite successful."

"I don't think that would do in this case."

"No. Exactly. I was merely quoting it as a matter of interest."

"I expect I shall be able to find someone," said Tony.

"I have no doubt of it," said the solicitor, bowing politely.

But when he came to discuss the question later with Jock, it did not
seem so easy. "It's not a thing one can ask every girl to do," he said,
"whichever way you put it. If you say it is merely a legal form it is
rather insulting, and if you suggest going the whole hog it's rather
fresh--suddenly, I mean, if you've never paid any particular attention
to her before and don't propose to carry on with it afterwards... Of
course there's always old Sybil."

But even Sybil refused. "I'd do it like a shot any other time," she
said, "but just at the moment it wouldn't suit my book. There's a
certain person who might hear about it and take it wrong... There's an
awfully pretty girl called Jenny Abdul Akbar. I wonder if you've met
her."

"Yes, I've met her."

"Well, won't she do?"

"No."

"Oh dear, I don't know who to suggest."

"We'd better go and study the market at the Old Hundredth," said Jock.

They dined at Jock's house. Lately they had found it a little gloomy at
Brown's, for people tended to avoid anyone they knew to be unhappy.
Though they drank a magnum of champagne they could not recapture the
light-hearted mood in which they had last visited Sink Street. And then
Tony said, "Is it any good going there yet?"

"We may as well try. After all, we aren't going there for enjoyment."

"No, indeed."

The doors were open at a Hundred Sink Street and the band was playing to
an empty ballroom. The waiters were eating at a little table in the
corner. Two or three girls were clustered round the Jack-Pot machine,
losing shillings hard and complaining about the cold. They ordered a
bottle of the Montmorency Wine Company's brand and sat down to wait.

"Any of those do?" asked Jock.

"I don't much care."

"Better get someone you like. You've got to put in a lot of time with
her."

Presently Milly and Babs came downstairs.

"How are the postmen's hats?" said Milly.

They could not recognize the allusion.

"You are the two boys who were here last month, aren't you?"

"Yes. I'm afraid we were rather tight."

"You don't say?" It was very seldom that Milly and Babs met anyone who
was quite sober during their business hours.

"Well, come and sit down. How are you both?"

"I think I'm starting a cold," said Babs. "I feel awful. Why can't they
heat this hole, the mean hounds?"

Milly was more cheerful and swayed in her chair to the music. "Care to
dance?" she said, and she and Tony began to shuffle across the empty
floor.

"My friend is looking for a lady to take to the seaside," said Jock.

"What, this weather? That'll be a nice treat for a lonely girl." Babs
sniffed into a little ball of a handkerchief.

"It's for a divorce."

"Oh, I see. Well, why doesn't he take Milly? She doesn't catch cold
easy. Besides, she knows how to behave at an hotel. Lots of the girls
here are all right to have a lark with in town, but you have to have a
_lady_ for a divorce."

"D'you often get asked to do that?"

"Now and then. It's a nice rest--but it means so much _talking_ and the
gentlemen will always go on so about their wives."

While they were dancing Tony came straight to business. "I suppose you
wouldn't care to come away for the week-end?" he asked.

"Shouldn't mind," said Milly. "Where?"

"I thought of Brighton."

"Oh... Is it for a divorce?"

"Yes."

"You wouldn't mind if I brought my little girl with us? She wouldn't be
any trouble."

"Yes."

"You mean you wouldn't mind?"

"I mean I should mind."

"Oh... You wouldn't think I had a little girl of eight, would you?"

"No."

"She's called Winnie. I was only sixteen when I had her. I was the
youngest of the family and our stepfather wouldn't leave any of us girls
alone. That's why I have to work. She lives with a lady at Finchley.
Twenty-eight bob a week it costs me, not counting her clothes. She does
like the seaside."

"No," said Tony. "I'm sorry but it would be quite impossible. We'll get
a lovely present for you to take back to her."

"All right... One gentleman gave her a fairy-cycle for Christmas. She
fell off and cut her knee... When do we start?"

"Would you like to go by train or car?"

"Oh, train. Winnie's sick if she goes in a car."

"Winnie's not coming."

"No, but let's go by train anyway."

So it was decided that they should meet at Victoria on Saturday
afternoon.

Jock gave Babs ten shillings and he and Tony went home, Tony had not
slept much lately. He could not prevent himself, when alone, from
rehearsing over and over in his mind all that had happened since
Beaver's visit to Hetton; searching for clues he had missed at the time;
wondering where something he had said or done might have changed the
course of events; going back further to his earliest acquaintance with
Brenda to find indications that should have made him more ready to
understand the change that had come over her; reliving scene after scene
in the last eight years of his life. All this kept him awake.


[II]

There was a general rendezvous at the first-class booking office. The
detectives were there earliest, ten minutes before their time. They had
been pointed out to Tony at the solicitor's office so that he should not
lose them. They were cheerful middle-aged men in soft hats and heavy
overcoats. They were looking forward to their week-end, for most of
their daily work consisted in standing about at street corners watching
front doors, and a job of this kind was eagerly competed for in the
office. In more modest divorces the solicitors were content to rely on
the evidence of the hotel servants. The detectives were a luxury and
proposed to treat themselves as such.

There was a slight fog in London that day. The station lamps were alight
prematurely.

Tony came next, with Jock at his side, loyally there to see him off.
They bought the tickets and waited. The detectives, sticklers for
professional etiquette, made an attempt at self-effacement, studying the
posters on the walls and peering from behind a pillar.

"This is going to be hell," said Tony.

It was ten minutes before Milly came. She emerged from the gloom with a
porter in front carrying her suitcase and a child dragging back on her
arm behind her. Milly's wardrobe consisted mainly of evening dresses,
for during the day she usually spent her time sitting before a gas fire
in her dressing-gown. She made an insignificant and rather respectable
appearance. "Sorry if I'm late," she said. "Winnie here couldn't find
her shoes. I brought her along too. I knew you wouldn't mind really. She
travels on a half ticket."

Winnie was a plain child with large gold-rimmed spectacles. When she
spoke she revealed that two of her front teeth were missing.

"I hope you don't imagine she's coming with us."

"Yes, that the idea," said Milly. "She won't be any trouble--she's got
her puzzle."

Tony bent down to speak to the little girl. "Listen," he said. "You
don't want to come to a nasty big hotel. You go with this kind gentleman
here. He'll take you to a shop and let you choose the biggest doll you
can find and then he'll drive you back in his motor to your home. You'll
like that, won't you?"

"No," said Winnie. "I want to go to the seaside. I won't go with that
man. I don't want a doll. I want to go to the seaside with my mummy."

Several people besides the detectives were beginning to take notice of
the oddly assorted group.

"Oh God!" said Tony. "I suppose she's got to come."

The detectives followed at a distance down the platform. Tony settled
his companions in a Pullman car. "Look," said Milly, "we're travelling
first-class. Isn't that fun? We can have tea."

"Can I have an ice?"

"I don't expect they've got an ice. But you can have some nice tea."

"But I want an ice."

"You shall have an ice when you get to Brighton. Now be a good girl and
play with your puzzle or mother won't take you to the seaside again."

"The Awful Child of popular fiction," said Jock as he left Tony.

Winnie sustained the part throughout the journey to Brighton. She was
not inventive but she knew the classic routine thoroughly, even to such
commonplace but alarming devices as breathing heavily, grunting and
complaining of nausea.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Rooms at the hotel had been engaged for Tony by the solicitors. It was
therefore a surprise to the reception clerk when Winnie arrived. "We
have reserved in your name double and single communicating rooms,
bathroom and sitting-room," he said. "We did not understand you were
bringing your daughter. Will you require a further room?"

"Oh, Winnie can come in with me," said Milly.

The two detectives who were standing nearby at the counter exchanged
glances of disapproval.

Tony wrote _Mr and Mrs Last_ in the Visitors' Book.

"And daughter," said the clerk with his finger on the place.

Tony hesitated. "She is my niece," he said, and inscribed her name on
another line, as _Miss Smith_.

The detective, registering below, remarked to his colleague, "He got out
of that all right. Quite smart. But I don't like the look of this case.
Most irregular. Sets a nasty, respectable note bringing a kid into it.
We've got the firm to consider. It doesn't do them any good to get mixed
up with the King's Proctor."

"How about a quick one?" said his colleague indifferently.

Upstairs, Winnie said, "Where's the sea?"

"Just there across the street."

"I want to go and see it."

"But it's dark now, pet. You shall see it to-morrow."

"I want to see it to-night."

"You take her to see it now," said Tony.

"Sure you won't be lonely?"

"Quite sure."

"We won't be long."

"That's all right. You let her see it properly."

Tony went down to the bar where he was pleased to find the two
detectives. He felt the need of male company. "Good evening," he said.

They looked at him askance. Everything in this case seemed to be
happening as though with deliberate design to shock their professional
feelings. "Good evening," said the senior detective. "Nasty, raw
evening."

"Have a drink."

Since Tony was paying their expenses in any case, the offer seemed
superfluous, but the junior detective brightened instinctively and said,
"Don't mind if I do."

"Come and sit down. I feel rather lonely."

They took their drinks to a table out of hearing of the barman. "Mr
Last, sir, this is all _wrong_," said the senior detective. "You haven't
no business to recognize us at all. I don't know what they'd say at the
office."

"Best respects," said the junior detective.

"This is Mr James, my colleague," said the senior detective. "My name is
Blenkinsop. James is new to this kind of work."

"So am I," said Tony.

"A pity we've such a nasty week-end for the job," said Blenkinsop, "very
damp and blowy. Gets me in the joints."

"Tell me," said Tony. "Is it usual to bring children on an expedition of
this kind?"

"It is _not_."

"I thought it couldn't be."

"Since you ask me, Mr Last, I regard it as most irregular and
injudicious. It looks wrong, and cases of this kind depend very much on
making the right impression. Of course as far as James and me are
concerned, the matter is O.K. There won't be a word about it in our
evidence. But you can't trust the servants. You might very likely happen
to strike one who was new to the courts, who'd blurt it out, and then
where would we be. I don't like it, Mr Last, and that's the truth."

"You can't feel more strongly about it than I do."

"Fond of kids myself," said James, who was new to this kind of work.
"How about one with us?"

"Tell me," said Tony, when they had been at their table some little
time. "You must have observed numerous couples in your time, qualifying
for a divorce; tell me, how do they get through their day?"

"It's easier in the summer," said Blenkinsop, "the young ladies usually
bathe and the gentlemen read the papers on the esplanade; some goes for
motor drives and some just hangs around the bar. They're mostly glad
when Monday comes."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Milly and her child were in the sitting-room when Tony came up.

"I've ordered an ice," said Milly.

"Quite right."

"I want late dinner. I want late dinner."

"No, dear, not late dinner. You have an ice up here."

Tony returned to the bar. "Mr James," he said. "Did I understand you to
say you were fond of children."

"Yes, in their right place."

"You wouldn't, I suppose, consider dining to-night with the little girl
who has accompanied me? I should take it as a great kindness."

"Oh no, sir, hardly that."

"You would not find me ungrateful."

"Well, sir, I don't want to appear unobliging, but it's not part of my
duties."

He seemed to be wavering but Blenkinsop interposed. "Quite out of the
question, sir."

When Tony left them Blenkinsop spoke from the depth of his experience;
it was the first job that he and James had been on together, and he felt
under some obligation to put his junior wise. "Our trouble is always the
same--to make the clients realize that divorce is a serious matter."

Eventually extravagant promises for the morrow, two or three ices, and
the slight depression induced by them persuaded Winnie to go to bed.

"How are we going to sleep?" asked Milly.

"Oh, just as you like."

"Just as _you_ like."

"Well, perhaps Winnie would be happier with you... she'll have to go
into the other room to-morrow morning when they bring in breakfast, of
course."

So she was tucked up in a corner of the double bed and to Tony's
surprise was asleep before they went down to dinner.

A change of clothes brought to both Tony and Milly a change of temper.
She, in her best evening frock, backless and vermilion, her face newly
done and her bleached curls brushed out, her feet in high red shoes,
some bracelets on her wrist, a dab of scent behind the large sham pearls
in her ears, shook off the cares of domesticity and was once more in
uniform, reporting for duty, a legionary ordered for active service
after the enervating restraints of a winter in barracks; and Tony,
filling his cigar case before the mirror, and slipping it into the
pocket of his dinner jacket, reminded himself that phantasmagoric, and
even gruesome as the situation might seem to him, he was nevertheless a
host, so that he knocked at the communicating door and passed with a
calm manner into his guest's room; for a month now he had lived in a
world suddenly bereft of order; it was as though the whole reasonable
and decent constitution of things, the sum of all he had experienced or
learned to expect, were an inconspicuous, inconsiderable object mislaid
somewhere on the dressing table; no outrageous circumstance in which he
found himself, no new, mad thing brought to his notice, could add a jot
to the all-encompassing chaos that shrieked about his ears. He smiled at
Milly from the doorway. "Charming," he said, "perfectly charming. Shall
we go down to dinner?"

Their rooms were on the first floor. Step by step, with her hand on his
arm, they descended the staircase into the bright hall below.

"Cheer up," said Milly. "You have a tongue sandwich. That'll make you
talk."

"Sorry, am I being a bore?"

"I was only joking. You are a serious boy, aren't you?"

In spite of the savage weather the hotel seemed full of week-end
visitors. More were arriving through the swing doors, their eyes moist
and their cheeks rigid from the icy cold outside.

"Yids," explained Milly superfluously. "Still, it's nice to get a change
from the club once in a while."

One of the new arrivals was a friend of Milly's. He was supervising the
collection of his luggage. Anywhere else he would have been a noticeable
figure, for he wore a large fur coat and a beret; under the coat
appeared tartan stockings and black and white shoes. "Take "em up and
get "em unpacked and quick about it," he said. He was a stout little
young man. His companion, also in furs, was staring resentfully at one
of the showcases that embellished the hall.

"Oh, for Christ's sake," she said.

Milly and the young man greeted each other. "This is Dan," she said.

"Well, well, well," said Dan, "what next?"

"Do I get a drink?" said Dan's girl.

"Baby, you do, if I have to get it myself. Won't you two join us, or are
we _de trop_?"

They went together into the glittering lounge. "I'm cold like hell,"
said Baby.

Dan had taken off his greatcoat and revealed a suit of smooth, purplish
plus-fours and a silk shirt of a pattern Tony might have chosen for
pyjamas. "We'll soon warm you up," he said.

"This place stinks of Yids," said Baby.

"I always think that's the sign of a good hotel, don't you?" said Tony.

"Like hell," said Baby.

"You mustn't mind Baby, she's cold," Dan explained.

"Who wouldn't be, in your lousy car?"

They had some cocktails. Then Dan and Baby went to their room; they must
doll up, they explained, as they were going to a party given by a friend
of Dan's, at a place of his near there. Tony and Milly went in to
dinner. "He's a very nice boy," she said, "and comes to the club a lot.
We get all sorts there, but Dan's one of the decent ones. I was going to
have gone abroad with him once but in the end he couldn't get away."

"His girl didn't seem to like us much."

"Oh, she was cold."

Tony did not find conversation easy at dinner. At first he commented on
their neighbours as he would have done if he had been dining with Brenda
at Espinosa's. "That's a pretty girl in the corner."

"I wonder you don't go and join her, dear," said Milly testily.

"Look at that woman's diamonds. Do you think they can be real?"

"Why don't you ask her, if you're so interested?"

"That's an interesting type--the dark woman dancing."

"I'm sure she'd be delighted to hear it."

Presently Tony realized that it was not etiquette in Milly's world to
express interest in women, other than the one you were with.

They drank champagne. So also, noticed Tony with displeasure, did the
two detectives. He would have something to say about that when their
bill for expenses came in. It was not as though they had been
accommodating in the matter of Winnie. All the time, at the back of his
mind, he was worrying with the problem of what they could possibly do
after dinner, but it was solved for him, just as he was lighting his
cigar, by the appearance of Dan from the other side of the dining-room.
"Look here," he said, "if you two aren't doing anything special, why
don't you join up with us and come to the party at my friend's place.
You'll like it. He always gives one the best of everything."

"Oh, do let's," said Milly.

Dan's evening clothes were made of blue cloth that was supposed to
appear black in artificial light; for some reason, however, they
remained very blue.

So Milly and Tony went to Dan's friend's place and had the best of
everything. There was a party of twenty or thirty people, all more or
less like Dan. Dan's friend was most hospitable. When he was not
fiddling with the wireless, which gave trouble off and on throughout the
evening, he was sauntering among his guests refilling their glasses.
"This stuff's all right," he said, showing the label, "it won't hurt
you. It's the right stuff."

They had a lot of the right stuff.

Quite often Dan's friend noticed that Tony seemed to be out of the
party. Then he would come across and put his hand on Tony's shoulder.
"I'm so glad Dan brought you," he would say. "Hope you're getting all
you want. Delighted to see you. Come again when there isn't a crowd and
see over the place. Interested in roses?"

"Yes, I like them very much."

"Come when the roses are out. You'd like that if you're interested in
roses. Damn that radio, it's going wonky again."

Tony wondered whether he was as amiable when people he did not know were
brought over unexpectedly to Hetton.

At one stage in the evening he found himself sitting on a sofa with Dan,
who said, "Nice kid, Milly."

"Yes."

"I'll tell you a thing I've noticed about her. She attracts quite a
different type from the other girls. People like you and me."

"Yes."

"You wouldn't think she had a daughter of eight, would you?"

"No, it's very surprising."

"I didn't know for ages. Then I was taking her to Dieppe for the
week-end and she wanted to bring the child along too. Of course that put
the kybosh on it, but I've always liked Milly just the same. You can
trust her to behave anywhere." He said this with a sour glance towards
Baby, who was full of the right stuff and showing it.

It was after three before the party broke up. Dan's friend renewed his
invitation to come again when the roses were out. "I doubt if you'll
find a better show of roses anywhere in the south of England," he said.

Dan drove them back to the hotel. Baby sat beside him in front, disposed
to be quarrelsome. "Where were you?" she kept asking. "Never saw you all
the evening. Where did you get to? Where were you hiding? I call it a
lousy way to take a girl out."

Tony and Milly sat at the back. From habit and exhaustion she put her
head on his shoulder and her hand in his. When they reached their rooms,
however, she said, "Go quietly. We don't want to wake Winnie."

For an hour or so Tony lay in the warm little bedroom, reviewing over
and over again the incidents of the last three months; then he too fell
asleep.

                 *        *        *        *        *

He was awakened by Winnie. "Mother's still asleep," she said.

Tony looked at his watch. "So I should think," he said. It was a
quarter-past seven. "Go back to bed."

"No, I'm dressed. Let's go out."

She went to the window and pulled back the curtains, filling the room
with glacial, morning light. "It's hardly raining at all," she said.

"What do you want to do?"

"I want to go on the pier."

"It won't be open yet."

"Well, I want to go down to the sea. Come on."

Tony knew that he would not get to sleep again that morning. "All right.
You go and wait while I dress."

"I'll wait here. Mother snores so."

Twenty minutes later they went downstairs into the hall where aproned
waiters were piling up the furniture and brushing the carpets. A keen
wind met them as they emerged from the swing door. The asphalt promenade
was wet with spray and rain. Two or three female figures were scudding
along, bowed to the wind, prayer-books clutched in their gloved hands.
Four or five rugged old men were hobbling down to bathe, hissing like
ostlers. "Oh, come on," said Winnie.

They went down to the beach and stumbled painfully across the shingle to
the margin of the sea. Winnie threw some stones. The bathers were in the
water now; some of them had dogs who swam snorting beside them.

"Why don't you bathe?" asked Winnie.

"Far too cold."

"But _they're_ bathing. I want to."

"You must ask your mother."

"I believe you're afraid. Can you swim?"

"Yes."

"Well, why don't you? Bet you can't."

"All right. I can't."

"Then why did you say you could. Fibber."

They walked along the shingle. Winnie slithered about astride a
backwater. "Now my knickers are wet," she said.

"Better come back and change."

"It feels horrible. Let's go and have breakfast."

The hotel did not, as a rule, cater for guests who breakfasted
downstairs at eight o'clock on Sunday morning. It took a long time
before anything could be got ready. There were no ices, much to Winnie's
annoyance. She ate grapefruit and kippers and scrambled eggs on toast,
complaining fitfully about her wet clothing. After breakfast Tony sent
her upstairs to change and himself smoked a pipe in the lounge and
glanced over the Sunday papers. Here at nine o'clock he was interrupted
by the arrival of Blenkinsop. "We missed you last night," he said.

"We went to a party."

"You shouldn't have done that--not strictly, but I daresay no harm will
come of it. Have you had your breakfast?"

"Yes, in the dining-room with Winnie."

"But, Mr Last, what are you thinking of? You've got to get evidence from
the hotel servants."

"Well, I didn't like to wake Milly."

"She's paid for it, isn't she? Come, come, Mr Last, this won't do at
all. You'll never get your divorce if you don't give your mind to it
more."

"All right," said Tony. "I'll have breakfast again."

"In bed, mind."

"In bed." And he went wearily upstairs to his rooms.

Winnie had drawn the curtains but her mother was still asleep. "She woke
up once and then turned over. Do get her to come out. I want to go on
the pier."

"Milly," said Tony firmly. "Milly."

"Oh," she said. "What time is it?"

"We've got to have breakfast."

"Don't want any breakfast. I think I'll sleep a little."

"You've had breakfast," said Winnie.

"Come on," said Tony. "Plenty of time to sleep afterwards. This is what
we came for."

Milly sat up in bed. "O.K.," she said. "Winnie, darling, give mother her
jacket off the chair." She was a conscientious girl, ready to go through
with her job, however unattractive it might seem. "But it's early."

Tony went into his room and took off his shoes, collar and tie, coat and
waistcoat, and put on a dressing-gown.

"You are greedy," said Winnie, "eating two breakfasts."

"When you're a little older you'll understand these things. It's the
Law. Now I want you to stay in the sitting-room for a quarter of an hour
very quietly. Promise? And afterwards you can do exactly what you like."

"Can I bathe?"

"Yes, certainly, if you're quiet now."

Tony got into bed beside Milly and pulled the dressing-gown tight round
his throat. "Does that look all right?"

"Love's young dream," said Milly.

"All right, then. I'll ring the bell."

When the tray had been brought, Tony got out of bed and put on his
things. "So much for my infidelity," he said. "It is curious to reflect
that this will be described in the papers as "intimacy"."

"Can I bathe now?"

"Certainly."

Milly turned over to sleep again. Tony took Winnie to the beach. The
wind had got up and a heavy sea was pounding on the shingle.

"This little girl would like to bathe," said Tony.

"No bathing for children to-day," said the beach attendant.

"The very idea," said various onlookers. "Does he want to drown the
child?" "He's no business to be trusted with children." "_Unnatural
beast._"

"But I _want_ to bathe," said Winnie. "You said I could bathe if you had
two breakfasts."

The people who had clustered round to witness Tony's discomfort, looked
at one another askance. "Two breakfasts? Wanting to let the child bathe?
The man's balmy."

"Never mind," said Tony. "We'll go on the pier."

Several of the crowd followed them round the slots, curious to see what
new enormity this mad father might attempt. "There's a man who's eaten
two breakfasts and tries to drown his little girl," they informed other
spectators, sceptically observing his attempts to amuse Winnie with
skee-ball. Tony's conduct confirmed the view of human nature derived
from the weekly newspapers which they had all been reading that morning.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Well," said Brenda's solicitor. "We have our case now, all quite
regular and complete. I don't think it can come on until next
term--there's a great rush at the moment, but there's no harm in you
having your own evidence ready. I've got it typed out for you. You'd
better keep it by you and get it clear in your mind."

"_...My marriage was an ideally happy one_," she read "_until shortly
before Christmas last year when I began to suspect that my husband's
attitude had changed towards me. He always remained in the country when
my studies took me to London. I realized that he no longer cared for me
as he used to. He began to drink heavily and on one occasion made a
disturbance at our flat in London, constantly ringing up when drunk and
sending a drunken friend round to knock on the door._ Is that
necessary?"

"Not strictly, but it is advisable to put it in. A great deal depends on
psychological impression. Judges in their more lucid moments sometimes
wonder why perfectly respectable, happily married men go off for
week-ends to the seaside with women they do not know. It is always
helpful to offer evidence of general degeneracy."

"I see," said Brenda. "_From then onwards I had him watched by private
agents and as a result of what they told me, I left my husband's house
on April 5th._ Yes, that all seems quite clear."
