[III]

Lady St Cloud preserved an atavistic faith in the authority and
preternatural good judgment of the Head of the Family; accordingly, her
first act, on learning from Marjorie of Brenda's wayward behaviour, was
to cable for Reggie's return from Tunisia where he was occupied in
desecrating some tombs. His departure, like all his movements, was
leisurely. He did not take the first available boat or the second, but
eventually he arrived in London on the Monday after Tony's visit to
Brighton. He held a family conclave in his library, consisting of his
mother, Brenda, Marjorie, Allan and the solicitor; later he discussed
the question fully with each of them severally; he took Beaver out to
luncheon; he dined with Jock; he even called on Tony's Aunt Frances.
Finally, on Thursday evening he arranged to meet Tony for dinner at
Brown's.

He was eight years older than Brenda; very occasionally a fugitive,
indefinable likeness was detectable between him and Marjorie, but both
in character and appearance he was as different from Brenda as it was
possible to imagine. He was prematurely, unnaturally stout, and he
carried his burden of flesh as though he were not yet used to it; as
though it had been buckled on to him that morning for the first time and
he were still experimenting for its better adjustment; there was an
instability in his gait and in his eyes a furtive look as though he were
at any moment liable to ambush and realized that he was unfairly
handicapped for flight. This impression, however, was due solely to his
physical appearance; it was the deep bed of fat in which his eyes lay
that gave them this look of suspicion; the caution of his movements
resulted from the exertion of keeping his balance and not from any
embarrassment at his own clumsiness, for it had never occurred to him
that he looked at all unusual.

Rather more than half Reggie St Cloud's time and income was spent abroad
in modest archaeological expeditions. His house in London was full of
their fruit--fragmentary amphoras, corroded bronze axe heads, little
splinters of bone and charred stick, a Graeco-Roman head in marble, its
features obliterated and ground smooth with time. He had written two
little monographs about his work, privately printed and both dedicated
to members of the royal family. When he came to London he was regular in
attendance at the House of Lords; all his friends were well over forty
and for some years now he had established himself as a member of their
generation; few mothers still regarded him as a possible son-in-law.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"This whole business of Brenda is _very_ unfortunate," said Reggie St
Cloud.

Tony agreed.

"My mother is extremely upset about it, naturally. I'm upset myself. I
don't mind admitting, perfectly frankly, that I think she has behaved
very foolishly, foolishly and wrongly. I can quite understand your being
upset about it too."

"Yes," said Tony.

"But all the same, making every allowance for your feelings, I do think
that you are behaving rather vindictively in the matter."

"I'm doing exactly what Brenda wanted."

"My dear fellow, she doesn't know what she wants. I saw this chap Beaver
yesterday. I didn't like him _at all_. Do you?"

"I hardly know him."

"Well, I can assure you I didn't like him. Now you're just throwing
Brenda into his arms. That's what it amounts to, as I see it, and I call
it vindictive. Of course, at the moment Brenda's got the idea that she's
in love with him. But it won't last. It couldn't with a chap like
Beaver. She'll want to come back in a year, just you see. Allan says the
same."

"I've told Allan. I don't want her back."

"Well, that's vindictive."

"No, I just couldn't feel the same about her again."

"Well, why feel _the same_? One has to change as one gets older. Why,
ten years ago I couldn't be interested in anything later than the
Sumerian age and I assure you that now I find even the Christian era
full of significance."

For some time he spoke about some _tabulae exsecrationum_ that he had
lately unearthed. "Almost every grave had them," he said, "mostly
referring to the circus factions, scratched on lead. They used to be
dropped in through a funnel. We had found forty-three up-to-date, before
this wretched business happened, and I had to come back. Naturally I'm
upset."

He sat for a little, eating silently. This last observation had brought
the conversation back to its point of departure. He clearly had more to
say on the subject and was meditating the most convenient approach. He
ate in a ruthless manner, champing his food (it was his habit, often,
without noticing it, to consume things that others usually left on their
plates, the heads and tails of whiting, whole mouthfuls of chicken bone,
peach stones and apple cores, cheese rinds and the fibrous parts of the
artichoke). "Besides, you know," he said, "it isn't as though it was all
Brenda's fault."

"I haven't been thinking particularly whose fault it is."

"Well, that's all very well, but you seem rather to be taking the line
of the injured husband--saying you can't feel the same again, and all
that. I mean to say, it takes two to make a quarrel and I gather things
had been going wrong for some time. For instance, you'd been drinking a
lot--have some more burgundy, by the way."

"Did Brenda say that?"

"Yes. And then you'd been going round a bit with other girls yourself.
There was some woman with a Moorish name you had to stay at Hetton while
Brenda was there. Well, that's a bit thick, you know. I'm all for people
going their own way, but if they do they can't blame others, if you see
what I mean."

"Did Brenda say that?"

"Yes. Don't think I'm trying to lecture you or anything, but all I feel
is that you haven't any right to be vindictive to Brenda, as things
are."

"She said I drank and was having an affair with the woman with a Moorish
name?"

"Well, I don't know she actually said that, but she said you'd been
getting tight lately and that you were certainly interested in that
girl."

The fat young man opposite Tony ordered prunes and cream. Tony said he
had finished dinner.

He had imagined during the preceding week-end that nothing could now
surprise him.

"So that really explains what I want to say," continued Reggie blandly.
"It's about money. I understand that when Brenda was in a very agitated
state just after the death of her child, she consented to some verbal
arrangement with you about settlements."

"Yes, I'm allowing her five hundred a year."

"Well, you know, I don't think that you have any right to take advantage
of her generosity in that way. It was most imprudent of her to consider
your proposal--she admits now that she was not really herself when she
did so."

"What does she suggest instead?"

"Let's go outside and have coffee."

When they were settled in front of the fire in the empty smoking-room,
he answered, "Well, I've discussed it with the lawyers and with the
family and we decided that the sum should be increased to two thousand."

"That's quite out of the question. I couldn't begin to afford it."

"Well, you know, I have to consider Brenda's interests. She has very
little of her own and there will be no more coming to her. My mother's
income is an allowance which I pay under my father's will. I shan't be
able to give her anything. I am trying to raise everything I can for an
expedition to one of the oases in the Libyan desert. This chap Beaver
has got practically nothing and doesn't look like earning any. So you
see--"

"But, my dear Reggie, you know as well as I do that it's out of the
question."

"It's rather less than a third of your income."

"Yes, but almost every penny goes straight back to the estate. Do you
realize that Brenda and I together haven't spent half that amount a year
on our personal expenses? It's all I can do to keep things going as it
is."

"I didn't expect you'd take this line, Tony. I think it's extremely
unreasonable of you. After all, it's absurd to pretend in these days
that a single man can't be perfectly comfortable on four thousand a
year. It's as much as I've ever had."

"It would mean giving up Hetton."

"Well, I gave up Brakeleigh, and I assure you, my dear fellow, I never
regret it. It was a nasty wrench at the time, of course, old association
and everything like that, but I can tell you this, that when the sale
was finally through I felt a different man, free to go where I liked..."

"But I don't happen to want to go anywhere else except Hetton."

"There's a lot in what these Labour fellows say, you know. Big houses
are a thing of the past in England."

"Tell me, did Brenda realize when she agreed to this proposal that it
meant my leaving Hetton?"

"Yes, it was mentioned, I think. I daresay you'll find it quite easy to
sell to a school or something like that. I remember the agent said when
I was trying to get rid of Brakeleigh that it was a pity it wasn't
Gothic, because schools and convents always go for Gothic. I daresay
you'll get a very comfortable price and find yourself better off in the
end than you are now."

"No. It's impossible," said Tony.

"You're making things extremely awkward for everyone," said Reggie. "I
can't understand why you are taking up this attitude."

"What is more, I don't believe that Brenda ever expected or wanted me to
agree."

"Oh yes, she did, my dear fellow. I assure you of that."

"It's inconceivable."

"Well," said Reggie, puffing at his cigar, "there's more to it than just
money. Perhaps I'd better tell you everything. I hadn't meant to. The
truth is that Beaver is cutting up nasty. He says he can't marry Brenda
unless she's properly provided for. Not fair on her, he says. I quite
see his point in a way."

"Yes, I see his point," said Tony. "So what your proposal really amounts
to, is that I should give up Hetton in order to buy Beaver for Brenda."

"It's not how I should have put it," said Reggie.

"Well, I'm not going to and that's the end of it. If that's all you
wanted to say, I may as well leave you."

"No, it isn't quite all I wanted to say. In fact I think I must have put
things rather badly. It comes from trying to respect people's feelings
too much. You see, I wasn't so much asking you to agree to anything as
explaining what our side propose to do. I've tried to keep everything on
a friendly basis but I see it's not possible. Brenda will ask for
alimony of two thousand a year from the Court and on our evidence we
shall get it. I'm sorry you oblige me to put it so bluntly."

"I hadn't thought of that."

"No, nor had we, to be quite frank. It was Beaver's idea."

"You seem to have got me in a fairly hopeless position."

"It's not how I should have put it."

"I should like to make absolutely sure that Brenda is in on this. D'you
mind if I ring her up?"

"Not at all, my dear fellow. I happen to know she's at Marjorie's
to-night."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Brenda, this is Tony... I've just been dining with Reggie."

"Yes, he said something about it."

"He tells me that you are going to sue for alimony. Is that so?"

"Tony, don't be so bullying. The lawyers are doing everything. It's no
use coming to me."

"But did you know that they proposed to ask for two thousand?"

"Yes. They did say that. I know it sounds a lot but..."

"And you know exactly how my money stands, don't you? You know it means
selling Hetton, don't you?... hullo, are you still there?"

"Yes, I'm here."

"You know it means that?"

"Tony, don't make me feel a beast. Everything has been so difficult."

"You do know just what you are asking?"

"Yes... I suppose so."

"All right, that's all I wanted to know."

"Tony, how odd you sound... don't ring off."

He hung up the receiver and went back to the smoking-room. His mind had
suddenly become clearer on many points that had puzzled him. A whole
Gothic world had come to grief... there was now no armour glittering
through the forest glades, no embroidered feet on the green sward; the
cream and dappled unicorns had fled...

Reggie sat expanded in his chair. "Well?"

"I got on to her. You were quite right. I'm sorry I didn't believe you.
It seemed so unlikely at first."

"That's all right, my dear fellow."

"I've decided exactly what's going to happen."

"Good."

"Brenda is not going to get her divorce. The evidence I provided at
Brighton isn't worth anything. There happens to have been a child there
all the time. She slept both nights in the room I am supposed to have
occupied. If you care to bring the case I shall defend it and win, but I
think when you have seen my evidence you will drop it. I am going away
for six months or so. When I come back, if she wishes it, I shall
divorce Brenda without settlements of any kind. Is that clear?"

"But look here, my dear fellow."

"Good night. Thank you for the dinner. Good luck to the excavations."

On his way out of the club he noticed that John Beaver of Bratt's Club
was up for election.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Who on earth would have expected the old boy to turn up like that?"
asked Polly Cockpurse.

"Now I understand why they keep going on in the papers about divorce law
reform," said Veronica. "It's _too_ monstrous that he should be allowed
to get away with it."

"The mistake they made was in telling him first," said Souki.

"It's so like Brenda to trust everyone," said Jenny Abdul Akbar.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"I do think Tony comes out of this pretty poorly," said Marjorie.

"Oh, I don't know," said Allan. "I expect your ass of a brother put the
thing wrong."




CHAPTER V
IN SEARCH OF A CITY


[I]

"any idea how many times round the deck make a mile?"

"None, I'm afraid," said Tony. "But I should think you must have walked
a great distance."

"Twenty-two times. One soon gets out of sorts at sea if you're used to
an active life. She's not much of a boat. Travel with this line often?"

"Never before."

"Ah. Thought you might have been in business in the islands. Not many
tourists going out this time of year. Just the other way about. All
coming home, if you see what I mean. Going far?"

"Demerara."

"Ah. Looking for minerals perhaps?"

"No, to tell you the truth I am looking for a city."

The genial passenger was surprised and then laughed. "Sounded just like
you said you were looking for a city."

"Yes."

"That _was_ what you said?"

"Yes."

"I thought it sounded like that... well, so long. I must do another few
rounds before dinner."

He paced off up the deck, straddling slightly in order to keep his
balance and occasionally putting out a hand to the rail for support.

Regularly every three minutes for the last hour or so, this man had come
by. At first Tony had looked up at his approach and then turned away
again, out to sea. Presently the man had taken to nodding, then to
saying "Hullo" or "Bit choppy" or "Here we are again"; finally he had
stopped and began a conversation.

Tony went aft to break this rather embarrassing sequence. He descended
the companion way which led to the lower deck. Here, in crates lashed to
the side, was a variety of livestock--some stud bulls, a heavily
blanketed racehorse, a couple of beagles, being exported to various West
Indian islands. Tony threaded a way between them and the hatches to the
stern, where he sat against a winch watching the horizon mount above the
funnels, then fall until they stood out black against the darkening sky.
The pitch was more sensible here than it had been amidships; the animals
shifted restlessly in their cramped quarters; the beagles whined
intermittently. A lascar took down from a line some washing which had
been flapping there all day.

The wash of the ship was quickly lost in the high waves. They were
steaming westward down the Channel. As it grew to be night, lighthouses
appeared flashing from the French coast. Presently a steward walked
round the bright, upper deck striking chimes on a gong of brass
cylinders, and the genial passenger went below to prepare himself for
dinner in hot sea water which splashed from side to side of the bath and
dissolved the soap in a thin, sticky scum. He was the only man to dress
that evening: Tony sat in the mustering darkness until the second bell.
Then he left his greatcoat in the cabin and went down to dinner.

It was the first evening at sea.

Tony sat at the captain's table, but the captain was on the bridge.
There were empty chairs on either side of him. It was not rough enough
for the fiddles to be out, but the stewards had removed the flower vases
and damped the tablecloth to make it adhesive. A coloured archdeacon sat
facing him. He ate with great refinement but his black hands looked
immense on the wet, whitish cloth. "I'm afraid our table is not showing
up very well to-night," he said. "I see you are not a sufferer. My wife
is in her cabin. _She_ is a sufferer."

He was returning from a Congress, he told Tony.

At the top of the stairs was a lounge named the Music and Writing Room.
The light here was always subdued, in the day by the stained glass of
the windows, at night by pink silk shades which hid the electric
candles. Here the passengers assembled for their coffee, sitting on
bulky, tapestry-covered chesterfields or on swivel chairs irremovably
fastened before the writing tables. Here too the steward for an hour
every day presided over the cupboardful of novels which constituted the
ship's library.

"It's not much of a boat," said the genial passenger, sitting himself
beside Tony. "But I expect things will look brighter when we get into
the sun."

Tony lit a cigar and was told by a steward that he must not smoke in
this room. "That's all right," said the genial passenger, "we're just
going down to the bar. You know," he said a few minutes later, "I feel I
owe you an apology. I thought you were potty just now before dinner.
Honestly I did, when you said you were going to Demerara to look for a
city. Well, it sounded pretty potty. Then the purser--I'm at his table.
Always get the cheeriest crowd at the purser's table _and_ the best
attention--the purser told me about you. You're the explorer, aren't
you?"

"Yes, come to think of it, I suppose I am," said Tony.

It did not come easily to him to realize that he was an explorer. It was
barely a fortnight ago that he had become one. Even the presence in the
hold of two vast crates, bearing his name and labelled _NOT WANTED ON
THE VOYAGE_--crates containing such new and unfamiliar possessions as a
medicine chest, an automatic shot-gun, camping equipment, pack saddles,
a cinema camera, dynamite, disinfectants, a collapsible canoe, filters,
tinned butter and, strangest of all, an assortment of what Dr Messinger
called "trade goods"--failed to convince him fully of the serious nature
of his expedition. Dr Messinger had arranged everything. It was he who
chose the musical boxes and mechanical mice, the mirrors, combs,
perfumery, pills, fish hooks, axe heads, coloured rockets and rolls of
artificial silk, which were packed in the box of "trade goods". And Dr
Messinger himself was a new acquaintance who, prostrate now in his bunk
with what the Negro clergyman would have called "suffering", that day,
for the first time since Tony had met him, seemed entirely human.

Tony had spent very little of his life abroad. At the age of eighteen,
before going to the University, he had been boarded for the summer with
an elderly gentleman near Tours, with the intention that he should learn
the language. (...a grey stone house surrounded by vines. There was a
stuffed spaniel in the bathroom. The old man had called it "Stop"
because it was chic at that time to give dogs an English name. Tony had
bicycled along straight, white roads to visit the chateaux; he carried
rolls of bread and cold veal tied to the back of the machine, and the
soft dust seeped into them through the paper and gritted against his
teeth. There were two other English boys there, so he had learned little
French. One of them fell in love and the other got drunk for the first
time on sparkling Vouvray at a fair that had been held in the town. That
evening Tony won a live pigeon at a tombola; he set it free and later
saw it being recaptured by the proprietor of the stall with a butterfly
net...) Later he had gone to Central Europe for a few weeks with a
friend from Balliol. (They had found themselves suddenly rich with the
falling mark and had lived in unaccustomed grandeur in the largest hotel
suites. Tony had bought a fur for a few shillings and given it to a girl
in Munich who spoke no English.) Later still his honeymoon with Brenda
in a villa, lent to them, on the Italian Riviera. (...Cypress and olive
trees, a domed church half-way down the hill, between the villa and the
harbour, a caf? where they sat out in the evening, watching the
fishing-boats and the lights reflected in the quiet water, waiting for
the sudden agitation of sound and motion as the speed-boat came in. It
had been owned by a dashing young official, who called it _Jazz Girl_.
He seemed to spend twenty hours a day running in and out of the little
harbour...) Once Brenda and he had gone to Le Touquet with Bratt's golf
team. That was all. After his father died he had not left England. They
could not easily afford it; it was one of the things they postponed
until death duties were paid off; besides that, he was never happy away
from Hetton, and Brenda did not like leaving John Andrew.

Thus Tony had no very ambitious ideas about travel, and when he decided
to go abroad his first act was to call at a tourist agency and come away
laden with a sheaf of brightly coloured prospectuses, which advertised
commodious cruises among palm trees, Negresses and ruined arches. He was
going away because it seemed to be the conduct expected of a husband in
his circumstances, because the associations of Hetton were for the time
poisoned for him, because he wanted to live for a few months away from
people who would know him or Brenda, in places where there was no
expectation of meeting her or Beaver or Reggie St Cloud at every corner
he frequented, and, with this feeling of evasion dominant in his mind,
he took the prospectuses to read at the Greville Club. He had been a
member there for some years, but rarely used it; his resignation was
postponed only by his recurrent omission to cancel the banker's order
for his subscription. Now that Bratt's and Brown's were distasteful to
him he felt thankful that he had kept on with the Greville. It was a
club of intellectual flavour, composed of dons, a few writers and the
officials of museums and learned societies. It had a tradition of
garrulity, so that he was not surprised when, seated in an armchair and
surrounded with his illustrated folders, he was addressed by a member
unknown to him who asked if he were thinking of going away. He was more
surprised when he looked up and studied the questioner.

Dr Messinger, though quite young, was bearded, and Tony knew few young
men with beards. He was also very small, very sunburned and prematurely
bald; the ruddy brown of his face ended abruptly along the line of his
forehead, which rose in a pale dome; he wore steel-rimmed spectacles and
there was something about his blue serge suit which suggested that the
wearer found it uncomfortable.

Tony admitted that he was considering taking a cruise.

"I am going away shortly," said Dr Messinger, "to Brazil. At least it
may be Brazil or Dutch Guiana. One cannot tell. The frontier has never
been demarcated. I ought to have started last week, only my plans were
upset. Do you by any chance know a Nicaraguan calling himself
alternately Ponsonby and FitzClarence?"

"No, I don't think I do."

"You are fortunate. That man has just robbed me of two hundred pounds
and some machine guns."

"Machine guns?"

"Yes, I travel with one or two, mostly for show, you know, or for trade,
and they are not easy to buy nowadays. Have you ever tried?"

"No."

"Well you can take it from me that it's not easy. You can't just walk
into a shop and order machine guns."

"No, I suppose not."

"Still, at a pinch I can do without them. But I can't do without two
hundred pounds."

Tony had, open on his knee, a photograph of the harbour at Agadir. Dr
Messinger looked over his shoulder at it. "Ah yes," he said,
"interesting little place. I expect you know Zingermaun there?"

"No, I've not been there yet."

"You'd like him--a very straight fellow. He used to do quite a lot,
selling ammunition to the Atlas caids before the pacification. Of course
it was easy money with the capitulations, but he did it better than most
of them. I believe he's running a restaurant now in Mogador." Then he
continued dreamily, "The pity is I can't let the R.G.S. in on this
expedition. I've got to find the money privately."

It was one o'clock and the room was beginning to fill up; an
Egyptologist was exhibiting a handkerchief-ful of scarabs to the editor
of a church weekly.

"We'd better go up and lunch," said Dr Messinger.

Tony had not intended to lunch at the Greville but there was something
compelling about the invitation; moreover, he had no other engagement.

Dr Messinger lunched off apples and a rice pudding. ("I have to be very
careful what I eat," he said.) Tony ate cold steak and kidney pie. They
sat at a window in the big dining-room upstairs. The places round them
were soon filled with members, who even carried the tradition of general
conversation so far as to lean back in their chairs and chat over their
shoulders from table to table--a practice which greatly hindered the
already imperfect service. But Tony remained oblivious to all that was
said, absorbed in what Dr Messinger was telling him.

"...You see, there has been a continuous tradition about the City since
the first explorers of the sixteenth century. It has been variously
allocated, sometimes down in Matto Grosso, sometimes on the upper
Orinoco in what is now Venezuela. I myself used to think it lay
somewhere on the Uraricuera. I was out there last year and it was then
that I established contact with the Pie-wie Indians; no white man had
ever visited them and got out alive. And it was from the Pie-wies that I
learned where to look. None of them had ever visited the City, of
course, but they _knew about it_. Every Indian between Ciudad Bolivar
and Para knows about it. But they won't talk. Queer people. But I became
blood-brother with a Pie-wie--interesting ceremony. They buried me up to
the neck in mud and all the women of the tribe spat on my head. Then we
ate a toad and snake and a beetle and after that I was
blood-brother--well, he told me that the City lies between the head
waters of the Courantyne and the Takutu. There's a vast track of
unexplored country there. I've often thought of visiting it."

"I've been looking up the historical side too, and I more or less know
how the City got there. It was the result of a migration from Peru at
the beginning of the fifteenth century, when the Incas were at the
height of their power. It is mentioned in all the early Spanish
documents as a popular legend. One of the younger princes rebelled and
led his people off into the forest. Most of the tribes had a tradition
in one form or another of a strange race passing through their
territory."

"But what do you suppose this city will be like?"

"Impossible to say. Every tribe has a different word for it. The
Pie-wies call it the 'Shining' or 'Glittering', the Arekuna the 'Many
Watered', the Patamonas the 'Bright Feathered', the Warau, oddly enough,
use the same word for it that they use for a kind of aromatic jam they
make. Of course, one can't tell how a civilization may have developed or
degenerated in five hundred years of isolation..."

Before Tony left the Greville that day, he tore up his sheaf of cruise
prospectuses, for he had arranged to join Dr Messinger in his
expedition.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Done much of that kind of thing?"

"No, to tell you the truth it is the first time."

"Ah. Well, I daresay it's more interesting than it sounds," conceded the
genial passenger, "else people wouldn't do it so much."

The ship, so far as any consideration of comfort had contributed to her
design, was planned for the tropics. It was slightly colder in the
smoking-room than on deck. Tony went to his cabin and retrieved his cap
and greatcoat; then he went aft again, to the place where he had sat
before dinner. It was a starless night and nothing was visible beyond
the small luminous area round the ship, save for a single lighthouse
that flashed short-long, short-long, far away on the port bow. The
crests of the waves caught the reflection from the promenade deck and
shone for a moment before plunging away into the black depths behind.
The beagles were awake, whining.

For some days now Tony had been thoughtless about the events of the
immediate past. His mind was occupied with the City, the Shining, the
Many Watered, the Bright Feathered, the Aromatic Jam. He had a clear
picture of it in his mind. It was Gothic in character, all vanes and
pinnacles, gargoyles, battlements, groining and tracery, pavilions and
terraces, a transfigured Hetton, pennons and banners floating on the
sweet breeze, everything luminous and translucent; a coral citadel
crowning a green hill-top sown with daisies, among groves and streams; a
tapestry landscape filled with heraldic and fabulous animals and
symmetrical, disproportionate blossom.

The ship tossed and tunnelled through the dark waters towards this
radiant sanctuary.

"I wonder if anyone is doing anything about those dogs," said the genial
passenger, arriving at his elbow. "I'll ask the purser to-morrow. We
might exercise them a bit. Kind of mournful the way they go on."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Next day they were in the Atlantic. Ponderous waves rising over murky,
opaque depths. Dappled with foam at the crests, like downland, where on
the high, exposed places snow has survived the thaw. Lead-grey and slate
in the sun, olive, field blue and khaki like the uniforms of a
battlefield; the sky overhead was neutral and steely with swollen clouds
scudding across it, affording rare half-hours of sunlight. The masts
swung slowly across this sky and the bows heaved and wallowed below the
horizon. The man who had made friends with Tony paraded the deck with
the two beagles. They strained at the end of their chains, sniffing the
scuppers; the man lurched behind them unsteadily. He wore a pair of race
glasses with which he occasionally surveyed the seas; he offered them to
Tony whenever they passed each other.

"Been talking to the wireless operator," he said. "We ought to pass
quite near the Yarmouth Castle at about eleven."

Few of the passengers were on their feet. Those who had come on deck lay
in long chairs on the sheltered side, pensive, wrapped in tartan rugs.
Dr Messinger kept to his cabin. Tony went to see him and found him
torpid, for he was taking large doses of chloral. Towards evening the
wind freshened and by dinner-time was blowing hard; portholes were
screwed up and all destructible objects disposed on the cabin floors; a
sudden roll broke a dozen coffee cups in the music and reading room.
That night there was little sleep for anyone on board; the plating
creaked, luggage shifted from wall to wall. Tony wedged himself firm in
his bunk with the lifebelt and thought of the City.

...Carpet and canopy, tapestry and velvet, portcullis and bastion,
waterfowl on the moat and kingcups along its margin, peacocks trailing
their finery across the lawns; high overhead in a sky of sapphire and
swansdown silver bells chiming in a turret of alabaster.

Days of shadow and exhaustion, salt wind and wet mist, foghorn and the
constant groan and creak of straining metal. Then they were clear of it,
after the Azores. Awnings were out and passengers moved their chairs to
windward. High noon and an even keel; the blue water lapping against the
sides of the ship, rippling away behind her to the horizon; gramophones
and deck tennis; bright arcs of flying fish ("Look, Ernie, come quick,
there's a shark." "That's not a shark, it's a dolphin." "Mr Brink said
it was a porpoise." "There he is again. Oh, if I had my camera.");
clear, tranquil water and the regular turn and tread of the screw; there
were many hands to caress the beagles as they went loping by. Mr Brink
amid laughter suggested that he should exercise the racehorse, or, with
a further burst of invention, the bull. Mr Brink sat at the purser's
table with the cheery crowd.

Dr Messinger left his cabin and appeared on deck and in the
dining-saloon. So did the wife of the archdeacon; she was very much
whiter than her husband. On Tony's other side at table sat a girl named
Th?r?se de Vitr?. He had noticed her once or twice during the grey days,
a forlorn figure almost lost among furs and cushions and rugs; a
colourless little face with wide dark eyes. She said, "The last days
have been terrible. I saw you walking about. How I envied you."

"It ought to be calm all the way now," and inevitably, "Are you going
far?"

"Trinidad. That is my home... I tried to decide who you were from the
passenger list."

"Who was I?"

"Well... someone called Colonel Strapper."

"Do I look so old?"

"Are colonels old? I didn't know. It's not a thing we have much in
Trinidad. Now I know who you are because I asked the head steward. Do
tell me about your exploring."

"You'd better ask Doctor Messinger. He knows more about it than I do."

"No, _you_ tell me."

She was eighteen years old; small and dark, with a face that disappeared
in a soft pointed chin so that attention was drawn to the grave eyes and
the high forehead; she had not long outgrown her schoolgirl plumpness
and she moved with an air of exultance, as though she had lately shed an
encumbrance and was not yet fatigued by the other burdens that would
succeed it. For two years she had been at school in Paris.

"...Some of us used to keep lipstick and rouge secretly in our bedrooms
and try it on at night. One girl called Antoinette came to Mass on
Sunday wearing it. There was a terrible row with Madame de Supplice and
she left after that term. It was awfully brave. We all envied her...
But she was an ugly girl, always eating chocolates..."

"...Now I am coming home to be married... No, I am not yet engaged,
but you see there are so few young men I can marry. They must be
Catholic and of an island family. It would not do to marry an official
and go back to live in England. But it will be easy because I have no
brothers or sisters and my father has one of the best houses in
Trinidad. You must come and see it. It is a stone house, outside the
town. My family came to Trinidad in the French Revolution. There are two
or three other rich families and I shall marry into one of them. Our son
will have the house. It will be easy..."

She wore a little coat, of the kind that was then fashionable, and no
ornament except a string of pearls. "...There was an American girl at
Madame de Supplice's who was engaged. She had a ring with a big diamond
but she could never wear it except in bed. Then one day she had a letter
from her young man saying he was going to marry another girl. How she
cried. We all read the letter and most of us cried too... But in
Trinidad it will be quite easy."

Tony told her about the expedition; of the Peruvian emigrants in the
middle ages and their long caravan working through the mountains and
forests, llamas packed with works of intricate craftsmanship; of the
continual rumours percolating to the coast and luring adventurers up
into the forests; of the route they would take up the rivers, then
cutting through the bush along Indian trails and across untravelled
country; of the stream they might strike higher up and how, Dr Messinger
said, they would make woodskin canoes and take to the water again; how
finally they would arrive under the walls of the city like the Vikings
at Byzantium. "But of course," he added, "there may be nothing in it. It
ought to be an interesting journey in any case."

"How I wish I was a man," said Th?r?se de Vitr?.

After dinner they danced to the music of an amplified gramophone and the
girl drank lemon squash on the bench outside the deck bar, sucking it
through two straws.

                 *        *        *        *        *

A week of blue water that grew clearer and more tranquil daily, of sun
that grew warmer, radiating the ship and her passengers, filling them
with good humour and ease; blue water that caught the sun in a thousand
brilliant points, dazzling the eyes as they searched for porpoises and
flying fish; clear blue water in the shallows revealing its bed of
silver sand and smooth pebble, fathoms down; soft warm shade on deck
under the awnings; the ship moved amid unbroken horizons on a vast blue
disc of blue, sparkling with sunlight.

Tony and Miss de Vitr? played quoits and shuffle-board; they threw rope
rings into a bucket from a short distance. ("We'll go in a small boat,"
Dr Messinger had said, "so as to escape all that hideous nonsense of
deck games.") Twice consecutively Tony won the sweepstake on the ship's
run; the prize was eighteen shillings. He bought Miss de Vitr? a woollen
rabbit at the barber's shop.

It was unusual for Tony to use "Miss" in talking to anyone. Except Miss
Tendril, he could think of no one he addressed in that way. But it was
Th?r?se who first called him "Tony", seeing it engraved in Brenda's
handwriting in his cigarette case. "How funny," she said, "that was the
name of the man who didn't marry the American girl at Madame de
Supplice's"; and after that they used each other's Christian names, to
the great satisfaction of the other passengers, who had little to
interest them on board except the flowering of this romance.

"I can't believe this is the same ship as in those cold, rough days,"
said Th?r?se.

They reached the first of the islands; a green belt of palm trees with
wooded hills rising beyond them and a small town heaped up along the
shores of a bay. Th?r?se and Tony went ashore and bathed. Th?r?se swam
badly, with her head ridiculously erect out of the water. There was
practically no bathing in Trinidad, she explained. They lay for some
time on the firm, silver beach; then drove back into the town in the
shaky, two-horse carriage he had hired, past ramshackle cabins from
which little black boys ran out to beg or swing behind on the axle, in
the white dust. There was nowhere in the town to dine so they returned
to the ship at sundown. She lay out at some distance, but from where
they stood after dinner, leaning over the rail, they could just hear, in
the intervals when the winch was not working, the chatter and singing in
the streets. Th?r?se put her arm through Tony's, but the decks were full
of passengers and agents and swarthy little men with lists of cargo.
There was no dancing that night. They went above on to the boat deck and
Tony kissed her.

Dr Messinger came on board by the last launch. He had met an
acquaintance in the town. He had observed the growing friendship between
Tony and Th?r?se with the strongest disapproval and told him of a friend
of his who had been knifed in a back street of Smyrna, as a warning of
what happened if one got mixed up with women.

In the islands the life of the ship disintegrated. There were changes of
passengers; the black archdeacon left after shaking hands with everyone
on board; on their last morning his wife took round a collecting box in
aid of an organ that needed repairs. The captain never appeared at meals
in the dining-saloon. Even Tony's first friend no longer changed for
dinner; the cabins were stuffy from being kept locked all day.

Tony and Th?r?se bathed again at Barbados and drove round the island
visiting castellated churches. They dined at an hotel high up out of
town and ate flying fish.

"You must come to my home and see what real creole cooking is like,"
said Th?r?se. "We have a lot of old recipes that the planters used to
use. You must meet my father and mother."

They could see the lights of the ship from the terrace where they were
dining; the bright decks with figures moving about and the double line
of portholes.

"Trinidad the day after to-morrow," said Tony.

They talked of the expedition and she said it was sure to be dangerous.
"I don't like Doctor Messinger at all," she said. "Not anything about
him."

"And you will have to choose your husband."

"Yes. There are seven of them. There was one called Honor? I liked, but
of course I haven't seen him for two years. He was studying to be an
engineer. There's one called Mendoza who's very rich but he isn't really
a Trinidadian. His grandfather came from Dominica and they say he has
coloured blood. I expect it will be Honor?. Mother always brought in his
name when she wrote to me and he sent me things at Christmas and on my
f?te. Rather silly things, because the shops aren't good in Port of
Spain."

Later she said, "You'll be coming back by Trinidad, won't you? So I
shall see you then. Will you be a long time in the bush?"

"I expect you'll be married by then."

"Tony, why haven't you ever got married?"

"But I am."

"Married?"

"Yes."

"You're teasing me."

"No, honestly I am. At least I was."

"Oh."

"Are you surprised?"

"I don't know. Somehow I didn't think you were. Where is she?"

"In England. We had a row."

"Oh... What's the time?"

"Quite early."

"Let's go back."

"D'you want to?"

"Yes, please. It's been a delightful day."

"You said that as if you were saying good-bye."

"Did I? I don't know."

The Negro chauffeur drove them at great speed into the town. Then they
sat in a rowing-boat and bobbed slowly out to the ship. Earlier in the
day, in good spirits, they had bought a stuffed fish. Th?r?se found she
had left it behind at the hotel. "It doesn't matter," she said.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Blue water came to an end after Barbados. Round Trinidad the sea was
opaque and colourless, full of the mud which the Orinoco brought down
from the mainland. Th?r?se spent all that day in her cabin, doing her
packing.

Next day she said good-bye to Tony in a hurry. Her father had come out
to meet her in the tender. He was a wiry bronzed man with a long grey
moustache. He wore a panama hat and smart silk clothes, and smoked a
cheroot; the complete slave-owner of the last century. Th?r?se did not
introduce him to Tony. "He was someone on the ship," she explained,
obviously.

Tony saw her once next day in the town, driving with a lady who was
obviously her mother. She waved but did not stop. "Reserved lot, these
real old creoles," remarked the passenger who had first made friends
with Tony and had now attached himself again. "Poor as church mice most
of them, but stinking proud. Time and again I've palled up with them on
board and when we got to port it's been good-bye. Do they ever so much
as ask you to their houses? Not they."

Tony spent the two days with his first friend who had business
connections in the place. On the second day it rained heavily and they
could not leave the terrace of the hotel. Dr Messinger was engaged on
some technical enquiries at the Agricultural Institute.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Muddy sea between Trinidad and Georgetown; and the ship lightened of
cargo rolled heavily in the swell. Dr Messinger took to his cabin once
more. Rain fell continuously and a slight mist enclosed them so that
they seemed to move in a small puddle of brown water; the foghorn
sounded regularly through the rain. Scarcely a dozen passengers remained
on board and Tony prowled disconsolately about the deserted decks or sat
alone in the music room, his mind straying back along the path he had
forbidden it, to the tall elm avenue at Hetton and the budding copses.

Next day they arrived at the mouth of the Demerara. The customs sheds
were heavy with the reek of sugar and loud with the buzzing of bees.
There were lengthy formalities in disembarking their stores, Dr
Messinger saw to it while Tony lit a cigar and strayed out on to the
quay. Small shipping of all kinds lay round them; on the farther bank a
low, green fringe of mangrove; behind, the tin roofs of the town were
visible among feathery palm trees; everything steamed from the recent
rain. Black stevedores grunted rhythmically at their work; West Indians
trotted busily to and fro with invoices and bills of lading. Presently
Dr Messinger pronounced that everything was in order and that they could
go into the town to their hotel.


[II]

The storm lantern stood on the ground between the two hammocks, which,
in their white sheaths of mosquito net, looked like the cocoons of
gigantic silkworms. It was eight o'clock, two hours after sundown; river
and forest were already deep in night. The howler monkeys were silent
but tree-frogs near at hand set up a continuous, hoarse chorus; birds
were awake, calling and whistling, and far in the depths about them came
the occasional rending and reverberation of dead wood falling among the
trees.

The six black boys who manned the boat squatted at a distance round
their fire. They had collected some cobs of maize, three days back in a
part of the bush, deserted now, choked and overrun with wild growth,
that had once been a farm. (The rank second growth at that place had
been full of alien plants, fruit and cereals, all gross now, and
reverting to earlier type.) The boys were roasting their cobs in the
embers.

Fire and storm lantern together shed little light; enough only to
suggest the dilapidated roof over their heads, the heap of stores,
disembarked and overrun by ants and, beyond, the undergrowth that had
invaded the clearing and the vast columns of tree-trunks that rose above
it, disappearing out of sight in the darkness.

Bats like blighted fruit hung in clusters from the thatch and great
spiders rode across it astride their shadows. This place had once been a
balata station. It was the farthest point of commercial penetration from
the coast. Dr Messinger marked it on his map with a triangle and named
it in red "First Base Camp".

The first stage of the journey was over. For ten days they had been
chugging upstream in a broad, shallow boat. Once or twice they had
passed rapids (there the outboard engine had been reinforced by paddles;
the men strained in time to the captain's count; the bo'sun stood in the
bows with a long pole warding off the rocks). They had camped at sundown
on patches of sandbank or in clearings cut from the surrounding bush.
Once or twice they came to a "house" left behind by balata bleeders or
gold washers.

All day Tony and Dr Messinger sprawled amidships among their stores,
under an improvised canopy of palm thatch; sometimes in the hot hours of
the early afternoon they fell asleep. They ate in the boat, out of tins,
and drank rum mixed with the water of the river, which was mahogany
brown but quite clear. The nights seemed interminable to Tony; twelve
hours of darkness, noisier than a city square with the squealing and
croaking and trumpeting of the bush denizens. Dr Messinger could tell
the hours by the succession of sounds. It was not possible to read by
the light of the storm lantern. Sleep was irregular and brief after the
days of lassitude and torpor. There was little to talk about; everything
had been said during the day, in the warm shade among the stores. Tony
lay awake, scratching.

Since they had left Georgetown there had not been any part of his body
that was ever wholly at ease. His face and neck were burned by the sun
reflected from the water; the skin was flaking off them so that he was
unable to shave. The stiff growth of beard pricked him between chin and
throat. Every exposed part of his skin was bitten by cabouri fly. They
had found a way into the buttonholes of his shirt and the laces of his
breeches; mosquitoes had got him at the ankles when he changed into
slacks for the evening. He had picked up b?tes rouges in the bush and
they were crawling and burrowing under his skin; the bitter oil which Dr
Messinger had given him as protection had set up a rash of its own
wherever he had applied it. Every evening after washing he had burned
off a few ticks with a cigarette-end but they had left irritable little
scars behind them; so had the djiggas which one of the black boys had
dug out from under his toenails and the horny skin on his heels and the
balls of his feet. A marabunta had left a painful swelling on his left
hand.

As Tony scratched, he shook the framework from which the hammocks hung.
Dr Messinger turned over and said, "Oh, for God's sake." He tried not to
scratch; then he tried to scratch quietly; then in a frenzy he scratched
as hard as he could, breaking the skin in a dozen places. "Oh, for God's
sake," said Dr Messinger.

"Half-past eight," thought Tony. "In London they are just beginning to
collect for dinner." It was the time of year in London when there were
parties every night. (Once, when he was trying to get engaged to Brenda,
he had gone to them all. If they had dined in different houses, he would
search the crowd for Brenda and hang about by the stairs waiting for her
to arrive. Later he would hang about to take her home. Lady St Cloud had
done everything to make it easy for him. Later, after they were married,
in the two years they had spent in London before Tony's father died,
they had been to fewer parties, one or two a week at the most, except
for one very gay month, when Brenda was well again after John Andrew's
birth.) Tony began to imagine a dinner party assembling at that moment
in London, with Brenda there and the surprised look with which she
greeted each new arrival. If there was a fire she would be as near it as
she could get. Would there be a fire at the end of May? He could not
remember. There were nearly always fires at Hetton in the evening,
whatever the season.

Then, after another bout of scratching, it occurred to Tony that it was
not half-past eight in England. There was five hours' difference in
time. They had altered their watches daily on the voyage out. Which way?
It ought to be easy to work out. The sun rose in the east. England was
east of America so he and Dr Messinger got the sun later. It came to
them at second-hand and slightly soiled after Polly Cockpurse and Mrs
Beaver and Princess Abdul Akbar had finished with it... Like Polly's
dresses which Brenda used to buy for ten or fifteen pounds each... he
fell asleep.

He woke an hour later to hear Dr Messinger cursing, and to see him
sitting astride his hammock working with bandages and iodine at his
great toe.

"A vampire bat got it. I must have gone to sleep with my foot against
the netting. God knows how long he had been at it, before I woke up.
That lamp ought to keep them off but it doesn't seem to."

The black boys were still awake, munching over the fire. "Vampires
plenty bad this side, Chief," they said. "Dat for why us no leave de
fire."

"It's just the way to get sick, blast it," said Dr Messinger. "I may
have lost pints of blood."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda and Jock were dancing together at Anchorage House. It was late,
the party was thinning, and now, for the first time that evening, it was
possible to dance with pleasure. The ballroom was hung with tapestry and
lit by candles. Lady Anchorage had lately curtsied her farewell to the
last royalty.

"How I hate staying up late," Brenda said, "but it seems a shame to take
my Mr Beaver away. He's so thrilled to be here, bless him, and it was a
great effort to get him asked... Come to think of it," she added later,
"I suppose that this is the last year _I_ shall be able to go to this
kind of party."

"You're going through with the divorce?"

"I don't know, Jock. It doesn't really depend on me. It's all a matter
of holding down Mr Beaver. He's getting very restive. I have to feed him
a bit of high-life every week or so, and I suppose that'll all stop if
there's a divorce. Any news of Tony?"

"Not for some time now. I got a cable when he landed. He's gone off on
some expedition with a crook doctor."

"Is it _absolutely_ safe?"

"Oh, I imagine so. The whole world is civilized now, isn't
it--charabancs and Cook's offices everywhere."

"Yes, I suppose it is... I hope he's not _brooding_. I shouldn't like
to think of him being unhappy."

"I expect he's getting used to things."

"I do hope so. I'm very fond of Tony, you know, in spite of the
monstrous way he behaved."

                 *        *        *        *        *

There was an Indian village a mile or two distant from the camp. It was
here that Tony and Dr Messinger proposed to recruit porters for the
two-hundred-mile march that lay between them and the Pie-wie country.
The niggers were river men and could not be taken into Indian territory.
They would go back with the boat.

At dawn Tony and Dr Messinger drank a mug each of hot cocoa and ate some
biscuits and what was left over from the bully beef opened the night
before. Then they set out for the village. One of the blacks went in
front with a cutlass to clear the trail. Dr Messinger and Tony followed,
one behind the other; another black came behind them carrying samples of
trade goods--a twenty-dollar Belgian gun, some rolls of printed cotton,
hand-mirrors in coloured celluloid frames, some bottles of highly
scented pomade.

It was a rough, unfrequented trail, encumbered by numerous fallen
trunks; they waded knee-deep through two streams that ran to feed the
big river; underfoot there was sometimes a hard network of bare root,
sometimes damp and slippery leaf-mould.

Presently they reached the village. They came into sight of it quite
suddenly, emerging from the bush into a wide clearing. There were eight
or nine circular huts of mud and palm thatch. No one was visible, but
two or three columns of smoke, rising straight and thin into the morning
air, told them that the place was inhabited.

"Dey people all afeared," said the black boy.

"Go and find someone to speak to us," said Dr Messinger.

The nigger went to the low door of the nearest house and peered in.

"Dere ain't no one but women dere," he reported. "Dey dressing
deirselves. Come on out dere," he shouted into the gloom. "De chief want
talk to you."

At last, very shyly, a little old woman emerged, clad in the filthy
calico gown that was kept for use in the presence of strangers. She
waddled towards them on bandy legs. Her ankles were tightly bound with
blue beads. Her hair was lank and ragged; her eyes were fixed on the
earthenware bowl of liquid which she carried. When she was a few feet
from Tony and Dr Messinger she set the bowl on the ground, and, still
with downcast eyes, shook hands with them. Then she stopped, picked up
the bowl once more and held it to Dr Messinger.

"Gassiri," he explained, "the local drink made of fermented cassava."

He drank some and handed the bowl to Tony. It contained a thick,
purplish liquid. When Tony had drunk a little, Dr Messinger explained,
"It is made in an interesting way. The women chew the root up and spit
it into a hollow tree-trunk."

He then addressed the woman in Wapishiana. She looked at him for the
first time. Her brown, Mongol face was perfectly blank, devoid alike of
comprehension and curiosity. Dr Messinger repeated and amplified his
question. The woman took the bowl from Tony and set it on the ground.

Meanwhile other faces were appearing at the doors of the huts. Only one
woman ventured out. She was very stout and she smiled confidently at the
visitors.

"Good morning," she said. "How do you do? I am Rosa. I speak English
good. I live bottom-side two years with Mr Forbes. You give me
cigarette."

"Why doesn't this woman answer?"

"She no speak English."

"But I was speaking Wapishiana."

"She Macushi woman. All these people Macushi people."

"Oh. I didn't know. Where are the men?"

"Men all go hunting three days."

"When will they be back?"

"They go after bush-pig."

"When will they be back?"

"No, bush-pig. Plenty bush-pig. Men all go hunting. You give me
cigarette."

"Listen, Rosa, I want to go to the Pie-wie country."

"No, this Macushi. All the people Macushi."

"But we want to go Pie-wie."

"No, _all_ Macushi. You give me cigarette."

"It's hopeless," said Dr Messinger. "We shall have to wait till the men
come back." He took a packet of cigarettes from his pocket. "Look," he
said, "cigarettes."

"Give me."

"When men come back from hunting you come to river and tell me.
Understand?"

"No, men hunting bush-pig. You give me cigarettes."

Dr Messinger gave her the cigarettes.

"What else you got?" she said.

Dr Messinger pointed to the load which the second nigger had laid on the
ground.

"Give me," she said.

"When men come back, I give you plenty things if men come with me to
Pie-wies."

"No, _all_ Macushi here."

"We aren't doing any good," said Dr Messinger. "We'd better go back to
camp and wait. The men have been away three days. It's not likely they
will be much longer... I wish I could speak Macushi."

They turned about, the four of them, and left the village. It was ten
o'clock by Tony's wrist watch when they reached their camp.

Ten o'clock on the river Waurupang was question time at Westminster. For
a long time now Jock had had a question which his constituents wanted
him to ask. It came up that afternoon.

"Number twenty," he said.

A few members turned to the order paper.

_No. 20._

"_To ask the Minister of Agriculture whether in view of the dumping in
this country of Japanese pork pies, the right honourable member is
prepared to consider a modification of the eight-and-a-half-score basic
pig from two and a half inches of thickness round the belly as
originally specified, to two inches._"

Replying for the Minister, the under-secretary said: "The matter is
receiving the closest attention. As the honourable member is no doubt
aware, the question of the importation of pork pies is a matter for the
Board of Trade, not for the Board of Agriculture. With regard to the
specifications of the basic pig, I must remind the honourable member
that, as he is doubtless aware, the eight-and-a-half-score pig is
modelled on the requirements of the bacon curers and has no direct
relation to pig meat for sale in pies. That is being dealt with by a
separate committee who have not yet made their report."

"Would the honourable member consider an increase of the specified
maximum of fatness on the shoulders?"

"I must have notice of that question."

Jock left the House that afternoon with the comfortable feeling that he
had at last done something tangible in the interest of his constituents.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Two days later the Indians returned from hunting. It was tedious
waiting. Dr Messinger put in some hours daily in checking the stores.
Tony went into the bush with his gun, but the game had all migrated from
that part of the river bank. One of the black boys was badly injured in
the foot and calf by a sting-ray; after that they stopped bathing and
washed in a zinc pail. When the news of the Indians' return reached
camp, Tony and Dr Messinger went to the village to see them, but a feast
had already started and everyone in the place was drunk. The men lay in
their hammocks and the women trotted between them carrying calabashes of
cassiri. Everything reeked of roast pork.

"It will take them a week to get sober," said Dr Messinger.

All that week the black boys lounged in camp; sometimes they washed
their clothes and hung them out on the gunwales of the boat to dry in
the sun; sometimes they went fishing and came back with a massive catch,
speared on a stick (the flesh was tasteless and rubbery); usually in the
evenings they sang songs round the fire. The fellow who had been stung
kept to his hammock, groaning loudly and constantly asking for medicine.

On the sixth day the Indians began to appear. They shook hands all round
and then retired to the margin of the bush where they stood gazing at
the camp equipment. Tony tried to photograph them but they ran away
giggling like schoolgirls. Dr Messinger spread out on the ground the
goods he had bought for barter.

They retired at sundown but on the seventh day they came again, greatly
reinforced. The entire population of the village was there. Rosa sat
down on Tony's hammock under the thatch roof.

"Give me cigarettes," she said.

"You tell them I want men to go Pie-wie country," said Dr Messinger.

"Pie-wie bad people. Macushi people no go with Pie-wie people."

"You say I want ten men. I give them guns."

"You give me cigarettes..."

Negotiations lasted for two days. Eventually twelve men agreed to come;
seven of them insisted on bringing their wives with them. One of these
was Rosa. When everything was arranged there was a party in the village
and all the Indians got drunk again. This time, however, it was a
shorter business as the women had not had time to prepare much cassiri.
In three days the caravan was able to set out.

One of the men had a long, single-barrelled, muzzle-loading gun; several
others carried bows and arrows; they were naked except for red cotton
cloths round their loins. The women wore grubby calico dresses--they had
been issued to them years back by an itinerant preacher and kept for
occasions of this kind; they had wicker panniers on their shoulders,
supported by a band across the forehead. All the heaviest luggage was
carried by the women in these panniers, including the rations for
themselves and their men. Rosa had, in addition, an umbrella with a
dented, silver crook, a relic of her association with Mr Forbes.

The Negroes returned downstream to the coast. A dump of provisions, in
substantial tin casing, was left in the ruinous shelter by the bank.

"There's no one to touch it. We can send back for it in case of
emergency from the Pie-wie country," said Dr Messinger.

Tony and Dr Messinger walked immediately behind the man with the gun who
was acting as guide; behind them the file straggled out for half a mile
or more through the forest.

"From now onwards the map is valueless to us," said Dr Messinger with
relish.

(Roll up the map--you will not need it again for how many years, said
William Pitt... memories of Tony's private school came back to him at
Dr Messinger's words, of inky little desks and a coloured picture of a
Viking raid, of Mr Trotter who had taught him history and wore very
vivid ties.)


[III]

"Mummy, Brenda wants a job."

"Why?"

"Just like everybody else, short of money and nothing to do. She
wondered if she could be any use to you at the shop."

"Well... It's hard to say. At any other time she is exactly the kind of
saleswoman I am always looking for... but I don't know. _As things
are_, I'm not sure it would be wise."

"I said I'd ask you, that's all."

"John, you never tell me _anything_ and I don't like to seem
interfering; but what _is_ going to happen between you and Brenda?"

"I don't know."

"You never tell me _anything_," repeated Mrs Beaver. "And there are so
many rumours going round. Is there going to be a divorce?"

"I don't know."

Mrs Beaver sighed. "Well, I must get back to work. Where are you
lunching?"

"Bratt's."

"Poor John. By the way, I thought you were joining Brown's."

"I haven't heard anything from them. I don't know whether they've had an
election yet."

"Your father was a member."

"I've an idea I shan't get in... anyway I couldn't really afford it."

"I'm not happy about you, John. I'm not sure that things are working out
as well as I hoped about Christmas-time."

"There's my telephone. Perhaps it's Margot. She hasn't asked me to
anything for weeks."

But it was only Brenda.

"I'm afraid mother's got nothing for you at the shop," he said.

"Oh well. I expect something will turn up. I could do with a little good
luck just at the moment."

"So could I. Have you asked Allan about Brown's?"

"Yes, I did. He says they elected about ten chaps last week."

"Oh, does that mean I've been blackballed?"

"I shouldn't know. Gentlemen are so odd about their clubs."

"I thought that you were going to make Allan and Reggie support me."

"I asked them. What does it matter anyway? D'you want to come to
Veronica's for the week-end?"

"I'm not sure that I do."

"_I'd_ like it."

"It's a beastly little house--and I don't think Veronica likes me.
Who'll be there?"

"I shall be."

"Yes... well, I'll let you know."

"Am I seeing you this evening?"

"I'll let you know."

"Oh dear," said Brenda as she rang off. "Now he's taken against me. It
isn't my fault he can't get into Brown's. As a matter of fact I believe
Reggie _did_ try to help."

Jenny Abdul Akbar was in the room with her. She came across every
morning now in her dressing-gown and they read the newspaper together.
Her dressing-gown was of striped Berber silk.

"Let's go and have a cosy lunch at the Ritz," she said.

"The Ritz isn't cosy at lunch-time and it costs eight and six. I daren't
cash a cheque for three weeks, Jenny. The lawyers are so disagreeable.
I've never been like this before."

"What wouldn't I do to Tony? Leaving you stranded like this."

"Oh, what's the good of knocking Tony? I don't suppose he's having a
packet of fun himself in Brazil or wherever it is."

"I hear they are putting in bathrooms at Hetton--while you are
practically starving. And he hasn't even gone to Mrs Beaver for them."

"Yes, I _do_ think that was mean."

Presently Jenny went back to dress. Brenda telephoned to a delicatessen
store round the corner for some sandwiches. She would spend that day in
bed, as she spent two or three days a week at this time. Perhaps, if
Allan was making a speech somewhere, as he usually was, Marjorie would
have her to dinner. The Helm-Hubbards had a supper party that night but
Beaver had not been asked. "If I went there without him it would be a
major bust-up... Come to think of it, Marjorie's probably going. Well,
I can always have sandwiches for dinner here. They make all kinds. Thank
God for the little shop round the corner." She was reading a biography
of Nelson that had lately appeared; it was very long and would keep her
going well into the night.

At one o'clock Jenny came in to say good-bye (she had a latch-key of
Brenda's), dressed for a cosy lunch. "I got Polly and Souki," she said.
"We're going to Daisy's joint. I _wish_ you were coming."

"Me? Oh, I'm all right," said Brenda, and she thought, "It might occur
to her to sock a girl a meal once in a way."

                 *        *        *        *        *

They walked for a fortnight, averaging about fifteen miles a day.
Sometimes they would do much more and sometimes much less; the Indian
who went in front decided the camping places; they depended on water and
evil spirits.

Dr Messinger made a compass traverse of their route. It gave him
something to think about. He took readings every hour from an aneroid.
In the evening, if they had halted early enough, he employed the last
hours of daylight in elaborating a chart. "_Dry watercourse, three
deserted huts, stony ground...._"

"We are now in the Amazon system of rivers," he announced with
satisfaction one day. "You see, the water is running south." But almost
immediately they crossed a stream flowing in the opposite direction.
"Very curious," said Dr Messinger. "A discovery of genuine scientific
value."

Next day they waded through four streams at intervals of two miles,
running alternately north and south. The chart began to have a mythical
appearance.

"Is there a name for any of these streams?" he asked Rosa.

"Macushi people called him Waurupang."

"No, not the river where we first camped. _These rivers._"

"Yes, Waurupang."

"_This river here._"

"Macushi people call him all Waurupang."

"It's hopeless," said Dr Messinger.

When they were near water they forced their way through blind bush; the
trail there was grown over and barred by timber; only Indian eyes and
Indian memory could trace its course; sometimes they crossed little
patches of dry savannah, dun grass growing in tufts from the baked
earth; thousands of lizards scampered and darted before their feet and
the grass rustled like newspaper; it was burning hot in these enclosed
spaces. Sometimes they climbed up into the wind, over loose red pebbles
that bruised their feet; after these painful ascents they would lie in
the wind till their wet clothes grew cold against their bodies; from
these low eminences they could see other hill-tops and the belts of bush
through which they had travelled, and the file of porters trailing
behind them. As each man and woman arrived he sank on to the dry grass
and rested against his load; when the last of them came up with the
party Dr Messinger would give the word and they would start off again,
descending into the green heart of the forest before them.

Tony and Dr Messinger seldom spoke to one another, either when they were
marching or at the halts, for they were constantly strained and
exhausted. In the evenings after they had washed and changed into dry
shirts and flannel trousers, they talked a little, mostly about the
number of miles they had done that day, their probable position and the
state of their feet. They drank rum and water after their bath; for
supper there was usually bully beef stewed with rice and flour
dumplings. The Indians ate farine, smoked hog and occasional delicacies
picked up by the way--armadillo, iguana, fat white grubs from the palm
trees. The women had some dried fish with them that lasted for eight
days; the smell grew stronger every day until the stuff was eaten; then
it still hung about them and the stores, but grew fainter until it
merged into the general, indefinable smell of the camp.

There were no Indians living in this country. In the last five days of
the march they suffered from lack of water. The streams they came to
were mostly dry; they had to reconnoitre up and down their beds in
search of tepid, stagnant puddles. But after two weeks they came to a
river once more, flowing deep and swift to the south-east. This was the
border of the Pie-wie country and Dr Messinger marked the place where
they stopped Second Base Camp. The cabouri fly infested this stream in
clouds.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"John, I think it's time you had a holiday."

"A holiday what from, mumsy?"

"A change... I'm going to California in July. To the Fischbaums--Mrs
Arnold Fischbaum, not the one who lives in Paris. I think it would do
you good to come with me."

"Yes, mumsy."

"You _would_ like it, wouldn't you?"

"Me? Yes, I'd like it."

"You've picked up that way of talking from Brenda. It sounds ridiculous
in a man."

"Sorry, mumsy."

"All right then, that's settled."

                 *        *        *        *        *

At sunset the cabouri fly disappeared. Until then, through the day, it
was necessary to keep covered; they settled on any exposed flesh like
house-flies upon jam; it was only when they were gorged that their bite
was perceptible; they left behind a crimson, smarting circle with a
black dot at its centre. Tony and Dr Messinger wore cotton gloves which
they had brought for the purpose, and muslin veils, hanging down under
their hats. Later they employed two women to squat beside their hammocks
and fan them with leafy boughs; the slightest breeze was enough to
disperse the flies, but as soon as Tony and Dr Messinger dozed the women
would lay aside their work, and they woke instantly, stung in a hundred
places. The Indians bore the insects as cows bear horse-flies; passively
with occasional fretful outbursts when they would slap their shoulders
and thighs.

After dark there was some relief, for there were few mosquitoes at this
camp, but they could hear the vampire bats all night long nuzzling and
flapping against their netting.

The Indians would not go hunting in this forest. They said there was no
game, but Dr Messinger said it was because they were afraid of the evil
spirits of the Pie-wie people. Provisions were not lasting as well as Dr
Messinger had calculated. During the march it had been difficult to keep
a proper guard over the stores. They were short of a bag of farine, half
a bag of sugar and a bag of rice. Dr Messinger instituted careful
rationing; he served them himself, measuring everything strictly in an
enamel cup; even so, the women managed to get to the sugar behind his
back. He and Tony had finished the rum, except for one bottle which was
kept in case of emergency.

"We can't go on breaking into tinned stores," said Dr Messinger
peevishly. "The men must go out and shoot something."

But they received the orders with expressionless, downcast faces and
remained in camp.

"No birds, no animals here," explained Rosa. "All gone. Maybe they get
some fish."

But the Indians could not be persuaded to exert themselves. They could
see the sacks and bales of food heaped on the bank; it would be plenty
of time to start hunting and fishing when that had been exhausted.

Meanwhile there were canoes to be built.

"This is clearly Amazon water," said Dr Messinger. "It probably flows
into the Rio Branco or the Rio Negro. The Pie-wies live along the bank,
and the City, from all accounts, must be downstream of us, up one of the
tributaries. When we reach the first Pie-wie village we will be able to
get guides."

The canoes were made of woodskin. Three days were spent in finding trees
of suitable age and straightness and in felling them. They cut four
trees and worked on them where they lay, clearing the bush for a few
feet round them. They stripped the bark with their broad-bladed knives;
that took another week. They worked patiently but clumsily; one woodskin
was split in getting it off the trunk. There was nothing Tony and Dr
Messinger could do to help. They spent that week guarding the sugar from
the women. As the men moved about the camp and the surrounding bush,
their steps were soundless; their bare feet seemed never to disturb the
fallen leaves, their bare shoulders made no rustle in the tangled
undergrowth; their speech was brief and scarcely audible, they never
joined in the chatter and laughter of their women; sometimes they gave
little grunts as they worked; only once they were merry, when one of
them let his knife slip as he was working on the tree-trunk and cut
deeply into the ball of his thumb. Dr Messinger dressed the wound with
iodine, lint and bandages. After that the women constantly solicited
him, showing him little scratches on their arms and legs and asking for
iodine.

Two of the trees were finished on one day, then another next day (that
was the one which split) and the fourth two days after that; it was a
larger tree than the others. When the last fibre was severed, four men
got round the trunk and lifted the skin clear. It curled up again at
once, making a hollow cylinder, which the men carried down to the
waterside and set afloat, fastening it to a tree with a loop of
vine-rope.

When all the woodskins were ready it was an easy matter to make canoes
of them. Four men held them open while two others fixed the struts. The
ends were left open, and curled up slightly so as to lift them clear
(when the craft was fully laden it drew only an inch or two of water).
Then the men set about fashioning some single-bladed paddles; that, too,
was an easy matter.

Every day Dr Messinger asked Rosa, "When will the boats be ready? Ask
the men." And she replied, "Just now."

"How many days--four?--five?--how many?"

"No, not many. Boats finish just now."

At last when it was clear that the work was nearly complete, Dr
Messinger busied himself with arrangements. He sorted out the stores,
dividing the necessary freight into two groups; he and Tony were to sit
in separate boats and each had with him a rifle and ammunition, a
camera, tinned rations, trade goods and his own luggage. The third
canoe, which would be manned solely by Indians, was to hold the flour
and rice, sugar and farine and the rations for the men. The canoes would
not hold all the stores and an "emergency dump" was made a little way up
the bank.

"We shall take eight men with us. Four can stay behind with the women to
guard the camp. Once we are among the Pie-wies, everything will be easy.
These Macushis can go home then. I don't think they will rob the stores.
There is nothing here that would be much use to them."

"Hadn't we better keep Rosa with us to act as interpreter with the
Macushis?"

"Yes, perhaps we had. I will tell her."

That evening everything was finished except the paddles. In the first
exhilarating hour of darkness, when Tony and Dr Messinger were able to
discard the gloves and veils that had been irking them all day, they
called Rosa across to the part of the camp where they ate and slept.

"Rosa, we have decided to take you down the river with us. We need you
to help us talk to the men. Understand?"

Rosa said nothing; her face was perfectly blank, lit from below by the
storm lantern that stood on a box between them; the shadow of her high
cheekbones hid her eyes; lank, ragged hair, a tenuous straggle of
tattooing along the forehead and lip, rotund body in its filthy cotton
gown, bandy brown legs.

"Understand?"

But still she said nothing; she seemed to be looking over their heads
into the dark forest, but her eyes were lost in shadow.

"Listen, Rosa, all women and four men stay here in camp. Eight men come
in boats to Pie-wie village. You come with boats. When we reach Pie-wie
village, you and eight men and boats go back to camp to other women and
men. Then back to Macushi country. Understand?"

At last Rosa spoke. "Macushi peoples no go with Pie-wie peoples."

"I am not asking you to go _with_ Pie-wie people. You and the men take
us as far as Pie-wies, then you go back to Macushi people. Understand?"

Rosa raised her arm in an embracing circle which covered the camp and
the road they had travelled and the broad savannahs behind them.
"Macushi peoples there," she said. Then she raised the other arm and
waved it downstream towards the hidden country. "Pie-wie peoples there,"
she said. "Macushi peoples no go with Pie-wie peoples."

"Now listen, Rosa. You are sensible, civilized woman. You lived two
years with black gentleman, Mr Forbes. You like cigarettes--"

"Yes, give me cigarettes."

"You come with men in boats, I give you plenty, plenty cigarettes."

Rosa looked stolidly ahead of her and said nothing.

"Listen. You will have your man and seven others to protect you. How can
we talk with men without you?"

"Men no go," said Rosa.

"Of course the men will go. The only question is, will you come too?"

"Macushi peoples no go with Pie-wie peoples," said Rosa.

"Oh God," said Dr Messinger wearily. "All right, we'll talk about it in
the morning."

"You give me cigarette...."

"It's going to be awkward if that woman doesn't come."

"It's going to be much more awkward if none of them come," said Tony.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Next day the boats were ready. By noon they were launched and tied in to
the bank. The Indians went silently about the business of preparing
their dinner. Tony and Dr Messinger ate tongue, boiled rice and some
tinned peaches.

"We're all right for stores," said Dr Messinger. "There's enough for
three weeks at the shortest and we are bound to come across the Pie-wies
in a day or two. We will start to-morrow."

The Indians' wages, in rifles, fish hooks and rolls of cotton, had been
left behind for them at their village. There were still half a dozen
boxes of "trade" for use during the later stages of the journey. A leg
of bush-pig was worth a handful of shot or twenty gun caps in that
currency; a fat game-bird cost a necklace.

When dinner was over, at about one o'clock, Dr Messinger called Rosa
over to them. "We start to-morrow," he said.

"Yes, just now."

"Tell the men what I told you last night. Eight men to come in boats,
others wait here. You come in boats. All these stores stay here. All
these stores go in boats. You tell men that."

Rosa said nothing.

"Understand?"

"No peoples go in boats," she said. "All peoples go this way," and she
extended her arm towards the trail that they had lately followed.
"To-morrow or next day all people go back to village."

There was a long pause; at last Dr Messinger said, "You tell the men to
come here.... It's no use threatening them," he remarked to Tony when
Rosa had waddled back to the fireside. "They are a queer, timid lot. If
you threaten them they take fright and disappear, leaving you stranded.
Don't worry, I shall be able to persuade them."

They could see Rosa talking at the fireside but none of the group moved.
Presently, having delivered her message, she was silent and squatted
down among them with the head of one of the women between her knees. She
had been searching it for lice when Dr Messinger's summons had
interrupted her.

"We'd better go across and talk to them."

Some of the Indians were in hammocks. The others were squatting on their
heels; they had scraped earth over the fire and extinguished it. They
gazed at Tony and Dr Messinger with slit, pig eyes. Only Rosa seemed
incurious; her head was averted; all her attention went to her busy
fingers as she picked and crunched the lice from her friend's hair.

"What's the matter?" asked Dr Messinger. "I told you to bring the men
here."

Rosa said nothing.

"So Macushi people are cowards. They are afraid of Pie-wie people."

"It is the cassava field," said Rosa. "We must go back to dig the
cassava. Otherwise it will be bad."

"Listen. I want the men for one, two weeks. No more. After that, all
finish. They can go home."

"It is the time to dig the cassava. Macushi people dig cassava before
the big rains. All people go home just now."

"It's pure blackmail," said Dr Messinger. "Let's get out some trade
goods."

He and Tony together prised open one of the cases and began to spread
out the contents on a blanket. They had chosen these things together at
a cheap store in Oxford Street. The Indians watched the display in
unbroken silence. There were bottles of scent and pills, bright
celluloid combs set with glass jewels, mirrors, pocket knives with
embossed aluminium handles, ribbons and necklaces and barter of more
solid worth in the form of axe heads, brass cartridge cases and flat,
red flasks of gunpowder.

"You give me this," said Rosa picking out a pale blue rosette, that had
been made as a boat race favour. "Give me this," she repeated, rubbing
some drops of scent into the palm of her hands and inhaling deeply.

"Each man can choose three things from this box if he comes in the
boats."

But Rosa replied monotonously, "Macushi peoples dig cassava field just
now."

"It's no good," said Dr Messinger after half an hour's fruitless
negotiation. "We shall have to try with the mice. I wanted to keep them
till we reached the Pie-wies. It's a pity. But they'll fall for the
mice, you see. I _know_ the Indian mind."

These mice were comparatively expensive articles; they had cost three
and sixpence each, and Tony remembered vividly the embarrassment with
which he had witnessed their demonstration on the floor of the toy
department.

They were of German manufacture; the size of large rats, but
conspicuously painted in spots of green and white; they had large glass
eyes, stiff whiskers and green-and-white-ringed tails; they ran on
hidden wheels, and inside them were little bells that jingled as they
moved. Dr Messinger took one out of their box, unwrapped the
tissue-paper and held it up to general scrutiny. There was no doubt that
he had captured his audience's interest. Then he wound it up. The
Indians stirred apprehensively at the sound.

The ground where they were camping was hard mud, inundated at flood
time. Dr Messinger put the toy down at his feet and set it going;
tinkling merrily it ran towards the group of Indians. For a moment, Tony
was afraid that it would turn over or become stuck against a root, but
the mechanism was unimpaired and by good chance there was a clear
course. The effect exceeded anything that he had expected. There was a
loud intake of breath, a series of horrified, small grunts, a high wail
of terror from the women, and a sudden stampede; a faint patter of bare
brown feet among the fallen leaves, bare limbs, quiet as bats, pushed
through the undergrowth, ragged cotton gowns caught and tore in the
thorn bushes. Before the toy had run down, before it had jingled its way
to the place where the nearest Indian had been squatting, the camp was
empty.

"Well, I'm damned," said Dr Messinger, "that's better than I expected."

"More than you expected, anyway."

"Oh, it's all right. They'll come back. I know them."

But by sundown there was still no sign. Throughout the hot afternoon
Tony and Dr Messinger, shrouded from cabouri fly, sprawled in their
hammocks. The empty canoes lay in the river; the mechanical mouse had
been put away. At sundown Dr Messinger said, "We'd better make a fire.
They'll come back when it is dark."

They brushed the earth away from the old embers, brought new wood and
made a fire; they lit the storm lantern.

"We'd better get some supper," said Tony.

They boiled water and made some cocoa, opened a tin of salmon and
finished the peaches that were left over from mid-day. They lit their
pipes and drew the sheaths of mosquito netting across their hammocks.
Most of this time they were silent. Presently they decided to go to
sleep.

"We shall find them all here in the morning," said Dr Messinger.
"They're an odd bunch."

All round them the voices of the bush whistled and croaked, changing
with the hours as the night wore on to morning.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Dawn broke in London, clear and sweet, dove grey and honey, with promise
of good weather; the lamps in the streets paled and disappeared; the
empty streets ran with water, and the rising sun caught it as it bubbled
round the hydrants; the men in overalls swung the nozzles of their hoses
from side to side and the water jetted and cascaded in a sparkle of
light.

"Let's have the window open," said Brenda. "It's stuffy in here."

The waiter drew back the curtains, opened the windows.

"It's quite light," she added.

"After five. Oughtn't we to go to bed?"

"Yes."

"Only another week and then all the parties will be over," said Beaver.

"Yes."

"Well, let's go."

"All right. Can you pay? I just haven't any money."

They had come on after the party, for breakfast at a club Daisy had
opened. Beaver paid for the kippers and tea. "Eight shillings," he said.
"How does Daisy expect to make a success of the place when she charges
prices like that?"

"It does seem a lot.... So you really _are_ going to America?"

"I must. Mother has taken the tickets."

"Nothing I've said to-night makes any difference?"

"Darling, don't go on. We've been through all that. You know it's the
only thing that _can_ happen. Why spoil the last week?"

"You _have_ enjoyed the summer, haven't you?"

"Of course... well, shall we go?"

"Yes. You needn't bother to see me home."

"Sure you don't mind? It _is_ miles out of the way and it's late."

"There's no knowing what I mind."

"Brenda, darling, for heaven's sake... It isn't like you to go on like
this."

"I never was one for making myself expensive."

                 *        *        *        *        *

The Indians returned during the night, while Tony and Dr Messinger were
asleep; without a word spoken the little people crept out of hiding; the
women had removed their clothes and left them at a distance so that no
twig should betray their movements; their naked bodies moved soundlessly
through the undergrowth; the glowing embers of the fire and the storm
lantern twenty yards away were their only light; there was no moon. They
collected their wicker baskets and their rations of farine, their bows
and arrows, the gun and their broad-bladed knives; they rolled up their
hammocks into compact cylinders. They took nothing with them that was
not theirs. Then they crept back through the shadows, into the darkness.

When Tony and Dr Messinger awoke it was clear to them what had happened.

"The situation is grave," said Dr Messinger. "But not desperate."


[IV]

For four days Tony and Dr Messinger paddled downstream. They sat,
balancing themselves precariously, at the two ends of the canoe; between
them they had piled the most essential of their stores; the remainder,
with the other canoes, had been left at the camp, to be called for when
they had recruited help from the Pie-wies. Even the minimum which Dr
Messinger had selected over-weighted the craft so that it was
dangerously low; any movement brought the water to the lip of the
gunwale and threatened disaster; it was heavy to steer and they made
slow progress, contenting themselves, for the most part, with keeping
end on, and drifting with the current.

Twice they came to stretches of cataract, and here they drew in to the
bank, unloaded and waded beside the boat, sometimes plunging waist-deep,
sometimes clambering over the rocks, guiding it by hand until they
reached clear water again. Then they tied up to the bank and carried
their cargo down to it through the bush. For the rest of the way the
river was broad and smooth; a dark surface which reflected in fine
detail the walls of forest on either side, towering up from the
undergrowth to their blossoming crown a hundred or more feet above them.
Sometimes they came to a stretch of water scattered with fallen petals
and floated among them, moving scarcely less slowly than they, as though
resting in a flowering meadow. At night they spread their tarpaulin on
stretches of dry beach, or hung their hammocks in the bush. Only the
cabouri fly and rare, immobile alligators menaced the peace of their
days.

They kept a constant scrutiny of the banks but saw no sign of human
life.

Then Tony developed fever. It came on him quite suddenly, during the
fourth afternoon. At their mid-day halt he was in complete health and
shot a small deer that came down to drink on the opposite bank; an hour
later he was shivering so violently that he had to lay down his paddle;
his head was flaming with heat, his body and limbs were frigid; by
sunset he was slightly delirious.

Dr Messinger took his temperature and found that it was a hundred and
four degrees, Fahrenheit. He gave him twenty-five grains of quinine and
lit a fire so close to his hammock that by morning it was singed and
blacked with smoke. He told Tony to keep wrapped up in his blanket, but
at intervals throughout that night he woke from sleep to find himself
running with sweat; he was consumed with thirst and drank mug after mug
of river water. Neither that evening nor next morning was he able to eat
anything.

But next morning his temperature was down again. He felt weak and
exhausted but he was able to keep steady in his place and paddle a
little.

"It was just a passing attack, wasn't it?" he said. "I shall be
perfectly fit to-morrow, shan't I?"

"I hope so," said Dr Messinger.

At mid-day Tony drank some cocoa and ate a cupful of rice. "I feel
grand," he said.

"Good."

That night the fever came on again. They were camping on a sand bank. Dr
Messinger heated stones and put them under Tony's feet and in the small
of his back. He was awake most of the night fuelling the fire and
refilling Tony's mug with water. At dawn Tony slept for an hour and woke
feeling slightly better; he was taking frequent doses of quinine and his
ears were filled with a muffled sound as though he were holding those
shells to them in which, he had been told in childhood, one could hear
the beat of the sea.

"We've got to go on," said Dr Messinger. "We can't be far from a village
now."

"I feel awful. Wouldn't it be better to wait a day till I am perfectly
fit again?"

"It's no good waiting. We've got to get on. D'you think you can manage
to get into the canoe?"

Dr Messinger knew that Tony was in for a long bout.

For the first few hours of that day Tony lay limp in the bows. They had
shifted the stores so that he could lie full length. Then the fever came
on again and his teeth chattered. He sat up and crouched with his head
in his knees, shaking all over; only his forehead and cheeks were
burning hot under the noon sun. There was still no sign of a village.

                 *        *        *        *        *

It was late in the afternoon when he first saw Brenda. For some time he
had been staring intently at the odd shape amidships where the stores
had been piled; then he realized that it was a human being.

"So the Indians came back?" he said.

"Yes."

"I knew they would. Silly of them to be scared by a toy. I suppose the
others are following."

"Yes, I expect so. Try and sit still."

"Damned fool, being frightened of a toy mouse," Tony said derisively to
the woman amidships. Then he saw that it was Brenda. "I'm sorry," he
said. "I didn't see it was you. You wouldn't be frightened of a toy
mouse."

But she did not answer him. She sat as she used often to sit when she
came back from London, huddled over her bowl of bread and milk.

Dr Messinger steered the boat in to the side. They nearly capsized as he
helped Tony out. Brenda got ashore without assistance. She stepped out
in her delicate, competent way, keeping the balance of the boat.

"That's what poise means," said Tony. "D'you know, I once saw a
questionnaire that people had to fill in when they applied for a job in
an American firm, and one of the things they had to answer was "Have you
poise?""

Brenda was at the top of the bank waiting for him. "What was so absurd
about the question was that they only had the applicant's word for it,"
he explained laboriously. "I mean--is it a sign of poise to think you
have it?"

"Just sit quiet here while I sling your hammock."

"Yes, I'll sit here with Brenda. I am so glad she could come. She must
have caught the three-eighteen."

She was with him all that night and all the next day. He talked to her
ceaselessly but her replies were rare and enigmatic. On the succeeding
evening he had another fit of sweating. Dr Messinger kept a large fire
burning by the hammock and wrapped Tony in his own blanket. An hour
before dawn Tony fell asleep and when he awoke Brenda had gone.

"You're down to normal again."

"Thank God. I've been pretty ill, haven't I? I can't remember much."

Dr Messinger had made something of a camp. He had chopped a square clear
of undergrowth, the size of a small room. Their two hammocks hung on
opposite sides of it. The stores were all ashore, arranged in an orderly
pile on the tarpaulin.

"How d'you feel?"

"Grand," said Tony, but when he got out of his hammock he found he could
not stand without help. "Of course, I haven't eaten anything. I expect
it will be a day or two before I'm really well."

Dr Messinger said nothing, but strained the tea clear of leaves by
pouring it slowly from one mug into another; he stirred into it a large
spoonful of condensed milk.

"See if you can drink this."

Tony drank it with pleasure and ate some biscuits.

"Are we going on to-day?" he asked.

"We'll think about it." He took the mugs down to the bank and washed
them in the river. When he came back he said, "I think I'd better
explain things. It's no use your thinking you are cured because you are
out of fever for one day. That's the way it goes. One day fever and one
day normal. It may take a week or it may take much longer. That's a
thing we've got to face. I can't risk taking you in the canoe. You
nearly upset us several times the day before yesterday."

"I thought there was someone there I knew."

"You thought a lot of things. It'll go on like that. Meanwhile we've
provisions for about ten days. There's no immediate anxiety there but
it's a thing to remember. Besides, what you need is a roof over your
head and constant nursing. If only we were at a village...."

"I'm afraid I'm being a great nuisance."

"That's not the point. The thing is to find what is best for us to do."

But Tony felt too tired to think; he dozed for an hour or so. When he
awoke, Dr Messinger was cutting back the bush farther. "I'm going to fix
up the tarpaulin as a roof."

(He had marked this place on his map _Temporary Emergency Base Camp_.)

Tony watched him listlessly. Presently he said, "Look here, why don't
you leave me here and go down the river for help?"

"I thought of that. It's too big a risk."

That afternoon Brenda was back at Tony's side and he was shivering and
tossing in his hammock.

                 *        *        *        *        *

When he was next able to observe things, Tony noted that there was a
tarpaulin over his head, slung to the tree-trunks. He asked, "How long
have we been here?"

"Only three days."

"What time is it now?"

"Getting on for ten in the morning."

"I feel awful."

Dr Messinger gave him some soup. "I am going downstream for the day," he
said, "to see if there's any sign of a village. I hate leaving you but
it's a chance worth taking. I shall be able to get a long way in the
canoe now it's empty. Lie quiet. Don't move from the hammock. I shall be
back before night. I hope with some Indians to help."

"All right," said Tony and fell asleep.

Dr Messinger went down to the river's edge and untied the canoe; he
brought with him a rifle, a drinking cup and a day's provisions. He sat
in the stern and pushed out from the bank; the current carried the bows
down and in a few strokes of the paddle he was in midstream.

The sun was high and its reflection in the water dazzled and scorched
him; he paddled on with regular, leisurely strokes; he was travelling
fast. For a mile's stretch the river narrowed and the water raced so
that all he had to do was to trail the blade of the paddle as a rudder;
then the walls of forest on either side of him fell back and he drifted
into a great open lake, where he had to work heavily to keep in motion;
all the time he watched keenly to right and left for the column of
smoke, the thatched dome, the sly brown figure in the undergrowth, the
drinking cattle, that would disclose the village he sought. But there
was no sign. In the open water he took up his field-glasses and studied
the whole wooded margin. But there was no sign.

Later the river narrowed once more and the canoe shot forward in the
swift current. Ahead of him the surface was broken by rapids; the smooth
water seethed and eddied; a low monotone warned him that beyond the
rapids was a fall. Dr Messinger began to steer for the bank. The current
was running strongly and he exerted his full strength; ten yards from
the beginning of the rapids his bows ran in under the bank. There was a
dense growth of thorn here, overhanging the river, the canoe slid under
them and bit into the beach; very cautiously Dr Messinger knelt forward
in his place and stretched up to a bough over his head. It was at that
moment he came to grief; the stern swung out downstream and as he
snatched at the paddle the craft was swept broadside into the troubled
waters; there it adopted an eccentric course, spinning and tumbling to
the falls. Dr Messinger was tipped into the water; it was quite shallow
in places and he caught at the rocks but they were worn smooth as ivory
and afforded no hold for his hands; he rolled over twice, found himself
in deep water and attempted to swim, found himself among boulders again
and attempted to grapple with them. Then he reached the falls.

They were unspectacular as falls go in that country--a drop of ten feet
or less--but they were enough for Dr Messinger. At their foot the foam
subsided into a great pool, almost still, and strewn with blossom from
the forest trees that encircled it. Dr Messinger's hat floated very
slowly towards the Amazon and the water closed over his bald head.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda went to see the family solicitors.

"Mr Graceful," she said, "I've got to have some more money."

Mr Graceful looked at her sadly. "I should have thought that was really
a question for your bank manager. I understand that your securities are
in your own name and that the dividends are paid into your account."

"They never seem to pay dividends nowadays. Besides, it's really very
difficult to live on so little."

"No doubt. No doubt."

"Mr Last left you with power of attorney, didn't he?"

"With strictly limited powers, Lady Brenda. I am instructed to pay the
wage bill at Hetton and all expenses connected with the upkeep of the
estate--he is putting in new bathrooms and restoring some decorations in
the morning-room which had been demolished. But I am afraid that I have
no authority to draw on Mr Last's account for other charges."

"But, Mr Graceful, I am sure he didn't intend to stay abroad so long. He
can't possibly have meant to leave me stranded like this, can he?...
Can he?"

Mr Graceful paused and fidgeted a little. "To be quite frank, Lady
Brenda, I fear that _was_ his intention. I raised this particular point
shortly before his departure. He was quite resolved on the subject."

"But is he _allowed_ to do that? I mean, haven't I got any rights under
the marriage settlement or anything?"

"Nothing which you can claim without application to the courts. You
_might_ find solicitors who would advise you to take action. I cannot
say that I should be one of them. Mr Last would oppose any such order to
the utmost and I think that, in the present circumstances, the courts
would undoubtedly find for him. In any case it would be a prolonged,
costly and slightly undignified proceeding."

"Oh, I see... well, that's that, isn't it?"

"It certainly looks as though it were."

Brenda rose to go. It was high summer and through the open windows she
could see the sun-bathed gardens of Lincoln's Inn.

"There's one thing. Do you know, I mean, can you tell me whether Mr Last
made another will?"

"I'm afraid that is a thing I cannot discuss."

"No, I suppose not. I'm sorry if it was wrong to ask. I just wanted to
know how I am with him."

She still stood between the door and the table, looking lost, in her
bright summer clothes. "Perhaps I can say as much as this to guide you.
The heirs-presumptive to Hetton are now his cousins, the Richard Lasts
at Princes Risborough. I think that your knowledge of Mr Last's
character and opinions will tell you that he would always wish his
fortune to go with the estate, in order that it may be preserved in what
he holds to be its right condition."

"Yes," said Brenda, "I ought to have thought of that. Well, good-bye."

And she went out alone into the sunshine.

                 *        *        *        *        *

All that day Tony lay alone, fitfully oblivious of the passage of time.
He slept a little; once or twice he left his hammock and found himself
weak and dizzy. He tried to eat some of the food which Dr Messinger had
left out for him, but without success. It was not until it grew dark
that he realized the day was over. He lit the lantern and began to
collect wood for the fire, but the sticks kept slipping from his fingers
and each time that he stooped he felt giddy, so that after a few fretful
efforts he left them where they had fallen and returned to his hammock.
And lying there, wrapped in his blanket, he began to cry.

After some hours of darkness the lamp began to burn low; he leant
painfully over, and shook it. It needed refilling. He knew where the oil
was kept, crept to it, supporting himself first on the hammock rope and
then on a pile of boxes. He found the keg, pulled out the bung and began
to refill the lamp, but his hand trembled and the oil spilled over the
ground, then his head began to swim again so that he shut his eyes; the
keg rolled over on its side and emptied itself with slow gurglings. When
he realized what had happened, he began to cry again. He lay down in his
hammock and in a few minutes the light sank, flickered and went out.
There was a reek of kerosene on his hands and on the sodden earth. He
lay awake in the darkness crying.

Just before dawn the fever returned and a constant company of phantoms
perplexed his senses.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda awoke in the lowest possible spirits. The evening before she had
spent alone at a cinema. Afterwards she felt hungry--she had had no
proper meal that day--but she had not the strength to go alone into any
of the supper restaurants. She bought a meat pie at a coffee stall and
took it home. It looked delicious but when she came to eat she found
that she had lost her appetite. The remains of that pie lay on the
dressing table when she awoke.

It was August and she was entirely alone. Beaver was that day landing in
New York. (He had cabled her from mid-ocean that the crossing was
excellent.) It was for her the last of Beaver. Parliament was over and
Jock Grant-Menzies was paying his annual visit to his elder brother in
Scotland; Marjorie and Allan at the last moment had made Lord Monomark's
yacht and were drifting luxuriously down the coast of Spain attending
bull-fights (they had even asked her to look after Djinn). Her mother
was at the chalet Lady Anchorage always lent her on the Lake of Geneva.
Polly was everywhere. Even Jenny Abdul Akbar was cruising in the Baltic.

Brenda opened her newspaper and read an article by a young man who said
that the London Season was a thing of the past; that everyone was too
busy in those days to keep up the pre-war routine; that there were no
more formal dances but a constant round of more modest entertaining;
that August in London was the gayest time of all (he rewrote this
annually in slightly different words). It did not console Brenda to read
that article.

For weeks past she had attempted to keep a fair mind towards Tony and
his treatment of her; now at last she broke down, and turning over
buried her face in the pillow in an agony of resentment and self-pity.

                 *        *        *        *        *

In Brazil she wore a ragged cotton gown of the same pattern as Rosa's.
It was not unbecoming. Tony watched her for some time before he spoke.
"Why are you dressed like that?"

"Don't you like it? I got it from Polly."

"It looks so dirty."

"Well, Polly travels about a lot. You must get up now to go to the
County Council meeting."

"But it isn't Wednesday?"

"No, but time is different in Brazil; surely you remember?"

"I can't get as far as Pigstanton. I've got to stay here until Messinger
comes back. I'm ill. He told me to be quiet. He's coming this evening."

"But all the County Council are here. The Shameless Blonde brought them
in her aeroplane."

Sure enough they were all there. Reggie St Cloud was chairman. He said,
"I strongly object to Milly being on the committee. She is a woman of
low repute."

Tony protested. "She has a daughter. She has as much right here as Lady
Cockpurse."

"Order," said the Mayor. "I must ask you gentlemen to confine your
remarks to the subject under discussion. We have to decide about the
widening of the Bayton-Pigstanton road. There have been several
complaints that it's impossible for the Green Line buses to turn the
corner safely at Hetton Cross."

"Green Line _rats_."

"I said Green Line rats. Mechanical green line rats. Many of the
villagers have been scared by them and have evacuated their cottages."

"I evacuated," said Reggie St Cloud. "I was driven out of my house by
mechanical green rats."

"Order," said Polly Cockpurse. "I move that Mr Last address the
meeting."

"Hear, hear."

"Ladies and gentlemen," said Tony. "I beg you to understand that I am
ill and must not move from the hammock. Dr Messinger has given the
clearest instructions."

"Winnie wants to bathe."

"No bathing in Brazil. No bathing in Brazil." The meeting took up the
cry. "No bathing in Brazil."

"But you had two breakfasts."

"Order," said the Mayor. "Lord St Cloud, I suggest you put the question
to the vote."

"The question is whether the contract for the widening of the corner of
Hetton Cross shall be given to Mrs Beaver. Of the tenders submitted hers
was by far the most expensive but I understand that her plans include a
chromium-plated wall on the south side of the village..."

"...and two breakfasts," prompted Winnie.

"...and two breakfasts for the men engaged on the work. Those in favour
of the motion will make a clucking sound in imitation of hens, those
against will say bow-wow."

"A most improper proceeding," said Reggie. "What will the servants
think?"

"We have got to do something until Brenda has been told."

"...Me? I'm all right."

"Then I take it the motion is carried."

"Oh, I _am_ glad Mrs Beaver got the job," said Brenda. "You see I'm in
love with John Beaver, I'm in love with John Beaver, I'm in love with
John Beaver."

"Is that the decision of the committee?"

"Yes, she is in love with John Beaver."

"Then that is carried unanimously."

"No," said Winnie. "He ate two breakfasts."

"...by an overwhelming majority."

"Why are you all changing your clothes?" asked Tony, for they were
putting on hunting coats.

"For the lawn meet. Hounds are meeting here to-day."

"But you can't hunt in summer."

"Time is different in Brazil and there is no bathing."

"I saw a fox yesterday in Bruton Wood. A mechanical green fox with a
bell inside him that jingled as he ran. It frightened them so much that
they ran away and the whole beach was deserted and there was no bathing
except for Beaver. He can bathe every day, for the time is different in
Brazil."

"I'm in love with John Beaver," said Ambrose.

"Why, I didn't know you were here."

"I came to remind you that you were ill, sir. You must on no account
leave your hammock."

"But how can I reach the City if I stay here?"

"I will serve it directly, sir, in the library."

"Yes, in the library. There is no point in using the dining-hall now
that her Ladyship has gone to live in Brazil."

"I will send the order to the stables, sir."

"But I don't want the pony. I told Ben to sell her."

"You will have to ride to the smoking-room, sir. Dr Messinger has taken
the canoe."

"Very well, Ambrose."

"Thank you, sir."

The committee had moved off down the avenue; all except Colonel Inch who
had taken the other drive and was trotting towards Compton Last. Tony
and Mrs Rattery were all alone.

"Bow-wow," she said, scooping in the cards. "That carries the motion."

Looking up from the card table, Tony saw beyond the trees the ramparts
and battlement of the City; it was quite near him. From the turret of
the gatehouse a heraldic banner floated in the tropic breeze. He
struggled into an upright position and threw aside his blankets. He was
stronger and steadier when the fever was on him. He picked his way
through the surrounding thorn-scrub; the sound of music rose from the
glittering walls; some procession or pageant was passing along them. He
lurched into three trunks and became caught up in roots and hanging
tendrils of bush-vine; but he pressed forward, unconscious of pain and
fatigue.

At last he came into the open. The gates were before him and trumpets
were sounding along the walls, saluting his arrival; from bastion to
bastion the message ran to the four points of the compass; petals of
almond and apple blossom were in the air; they carpeted the way, as,
after a summer storm, they lay in the orchards at Hetton. Gilded cupolas
and spires of alabaster shone in the sunlight.

Ambrose announced, "The City is served."




CHAPTER VI
DU C?T? DE CHEZ TODD


Although Mr Todd had lived in Amazonas for nearly six years, no
one except a few families of Pie-wie Indians was aware of his existence.
His house stood in a small savannah, one of those little patches of sand
and grass that crop up occasionally in that neighbourhood, three miles
or so across, bounded on all sides by forest.

The stream which watered it was not marked on any map; it ran through
rapids, always dangerous and at most seasons of the year impassable, to
join the upper waters of the river where Dr Messinger had come to grief.
None of the inhabitants of the district, except Mr Todd, had ever heard
of the governments of Brazil or Dutch Guiana, both of which from time to
time claimed its possession.

Mr Todd's house was larger than those of his neighbours, but similar in
character--a palm thatch roof, breast-high walls of mud and wattle, and
a mud floor. He owned the dozen or so head of puny cattle which grazed
in the savannah, a plantation of cassava, some banana and mango trees, a
dog and, unique in the neighbourhood, a single-barrelled, breech-loading
shot-gun. The few commodities which he employed from the outside world
came to him through a long succession of traders, passed from hand to
hand, bartered for in a dozen languages at the extreme end of one of the
longest threads in the web of commerce that spreads from Man?os into the
remote fastness of the forest.

One day while Mr Todd was engaged in filling some cartridges, a Pie-wie
came to him with the news that a white man was approaching through the
forest, alone and very sick. He closed the cartridge and loaded his gun
with it, put those that were finished into his pocket and set out in the
direction indicated.

The man was already clear of the bush when Mr Todd reached him, sitting
on the ground, clearly in a very bad way. He was without hat or boots,
and his clothes were so torn that it was only by the dampness of his
body that they adhered to it; his feet were cut and grossly swollen;
every exposed surface of skin was scarred by insect and bat bites; his
eyes were wild with fever. He was talking to himself in delirium but
stopped when Todd approached and addressed him in English.

"You're the first person who's spoken to me for days," said Tony. "The
others won't stop. They keep bicycling by... I'm tired... Brenda was
with me at first but she was frightened by a mechanical mouse, so she
took the canoe and went off. She said she would come back that evening
but she didn't. I expect she's staying with one of her new friends in
Brazil... You haven't seen her, have you?"

"You are the first stranger I have seen for a very long time."

"She was wearing a top hat when she left. You can't miss her." Then he
began talking to someone at Mr Todd's side, who was not there.

"Do you see that house over there? Do you think you can manage to walk
to it? If not, I can send some Indians to carry you."

Tony squinted across the savannah at Mr Todd's hut.

"Architecture harmonizing with local character," he said, "indigenous
material employed throughout. Don't let Mrs Beaver see it or she will
cover it with chromium plating."

"Try and walk." Mr Todd hoisted Tony to his feet and supported him with
a stout arm.

"I'll ride your bicycle. It _was_ you I passed just now on a bicycle,
wasn't it?... except that your beard is a different colour. His was
green... green as mice."

Mr Todd led Tony across the hummocks of grass towards the house.

"It is a very short way. When we get there I will give you something to
make you better."

"Very kind of you... rotten thing for a man to have his wife go away in
a canoe. That was a long time ago. Nothing to eat since." Presently he
said, "I say, you're English. I'm English too. My name is Last."

"Well, Mr Last, you aren't to bother about anything more. You're ill and
you've had a rough journey. I'll take care of you."

Tony looked round him. "Are you all English?"

"Yes, all of us."

"That dark girl married a Moor... It's very lucky I met you all. I
suppose you're some kind of cycling club?"

"Yes."

"Well, I feel too tired for bicycling... never liked it much...
you fellows ought to get motor bicycles, you know, much faster and
noisier... Let's stop here."

"No, you must come as far as the house. It's not very much farther."

"All right... I suppose you would have some difficulty getting petrol
here."

They went very slowly, but at length reached the house.

"Lie there in the hammock."

"That's what Messinger said. He's in love with John Beaver."

"I will get something for you."

"Very good of you. Just my usual morning tray--coffee, toast, fruit. And
the morning papers. If her Ladyship has been called I will have it with
her..."

Mr Todd went into the back room of the house and dragged a tin canister
from under a heap of skins. It was full of a mixture of dried leaf and
bark. He took a handful and went outside to the fire. When he returned
his guest was bolt upright astride the hammock, talking angrily.

"...You would hear better and it would be more polite if you stood
still when I addressed you instead of walking round in a circle. It is
for your own good that I am telling you... I know you are friends of my
wife and that is why you will not listen to me. But be careful. She will
say nothing cruel, she will not raise her voice, there will be no hard
words. She hopes you will be great friends afterwards as before. But she
will leave you. She will go away quietly during the night. She will take
her hammock and her rations of farine... Listen to me. I know I am not
clever but that is no reason why we should forget all courtesy. Let us
kill in the gentlest manner. I will tell you what I have learned in the
forest, where time is different. There is no City. Mrs Beaver has
covered it with chromium plating and converted it into flats. Three
guineas a week, each with a separate bathroom. Very suitable for base
love. And Polly will be there. She and Mrs Beaver under the fallen
battlements..."

Mr Todd put a hand behind Tony's head and held up the concoction of
herbs in the calabash. Tony sipped and turned away his head.

"Nasty medicine," he said, and began to cry.

Mr Todd stood by him holding the calabash. Presently Tony drank some
more, screwing up his face and shuddering slightly at the bitterness. Mr
Todd stood beside him until the draught was finished; then he threw out
the dregs on to the mud floor. Tony lay back in the hammock sobbing
quietly. Soon he fell into a deep sleep.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Tony's recovery was slow. At first, days of lucidity alternated with
delirium; then his temperature dropped and he was conscious even when
most ill. The days of fever grew less frequent, finally occurring in the
normal system of the tropics, between long periods of comparative
health. Mr Todd dosed him regularly with herbal remedies.

"It's very nasty," said Tony, "but it does do good."

"There is medicine for everything in the forest," said Mr Todd; "to make
you well and to make you ill. My mother was an Indian and she taught me
many of them. I have learned others from time to time from my wives.
There are plants to cure you and give you fever, to kill you and send
you mad, to keep away snakes, to intoxicate fish so that you can pick
them out of the water with your hands like fruit from a tree. There are
medicines even I do not know. They say that it is possible to bring dead
people to life after they have begun to stink, but I have not seen it
done."

"But surely you are English?"

"My father was--at least a Barbadian. He came to Guiana as a missionary.
He was married to a white woman but he left her in Guiana to look for
gold. Then he took my mother. The Pie-wie women are ugly but very
devoted. I have had many. Most of the men and women living in this
savannah are my children. That is why they obey--for that reason and
because I have the gun. My father lived to a great age. It is not twenty
years since he died. He was a man of education. Can you read?"

"Yes, of course."

"It is not everyone who is so fortunate. I cannot."

Tony laughed apologetically. "But I suppose you haven't much opportunity
here."

"Oh yes, that is just it. I have a _great_ many books. I will show you
when you are better. Until five years ago there was an Englishman--at
least a black man, but he was well educated in Georgetown. He died. He
used to read to me every day until he died. You shall read to me when
you are better."

"I shall be delighted to."

"Yes, you shall read to me," Mr Todd repeated, nodding over the
calabash.

During the early days of his convalescence Tony had little conversation
with his host, he lay in the hammock staring up at the thatched roof and
thinking about Brenda. The days, exactly twelve hours each, passed
without distinction. Mr Todd retired to sleep at sundown, leaving a
little lamp burning--a handwoven wick drooping from a pot of beef
fat--to keep away vampire bats.

The first time that Tony left the house Mr Todd took him for a little
stroll around the farm.

"I will show you the black man's grave," he said, leading him to a mound
between the mango trees. "He was very kind. Every afternoon until he
died, for two hours, he used to read to me. I think I will put up a
cross--to commemorate his death and your arrival--a pretty idea. Do you
believe in God?"

"I suppose so. I've never really thought about it much."

"I have thought about it a _great_ deal and I still do not know...
Dickens did."

"I suppose so."

"Oh yes, it is apparent in all his books. You will see."

That afternoon Mr Todd began the construction of a headpiece for the
Negro's grave. He worked with a large spoke-shave in a wood so hard that
it grated and rang like metal.

At last, when Tony had passed six or seven consecutive nights without
fever, Mr Todd said, "Now I think you are well enough to see the books."

At one end of the hut there was a kind of loft formed by a rough
platform erected in the eaves of the roof. Mr Todd propped a ladder
against it and mounted. Tony followed, still unsteady after his illness.
Mr Todd sat on the platform and Tony stood at the top of the ladder
looking over. There was a heap of bundles there, tied up with rag, palm
leaf and raw hide.

"It has been hard to keep out the worms and ants. Two are practically
destroyed. But there is an oil the Indians make that is useful."

He unwrapped the nearest parcel and handed down a calf-bound book. It
was an early American edition of _Bleak House_.

"It does not matter which we take first."

"You are fond of Dickens?"

"Why, yes, of course. More than fond, far more. You see, they are the
only books I have ever heard. My father used to read them and then later
the black man... and now you. I have heard them all several times by
now but I never get tired; there is always more to be learned and
noticed, so many characters, so many changes of scene, so many words...
I have all Dickens's books here except those that the ants devoured. It
takes a long time to read them all--more than two years."

"Well," said Tony lightly, "they will well last out my visit."

"Oh, I hope not. It is delightful to start again. Each time I think I
find more to enjoy and admire."

They took down the first volume of _Bleak House_ and that afternoon Tony
had his first reading.

He had always rather enjoyed reading aloud and in the first year of
marriage had shared several books in this way with Brenda, until one
day, in a moment of frankness, she remarked that it was torture to her.
He had read to John Andrew, late in the afternoon, in winter, while the
child sat before the nursery fender eating his supper. But Mr Todd was a
unique audience.

The old man sat astride his hammock opposite Tony, fixing him throughout
with his eyes, and following the words, soundlessly, with his lips.
Often when a new character was introduced he would say, "Repeat the
name, I have forgotten him," or "Yes, yes, I remember her well. She
dies, poor woman." He would frequently interrupt with questions; not as
Tony would have imagined about the circumstances of the story--such
things as the procedure of the Lord Chancellor's Court or the social
conventions of the time, though they must have been unintelligible, did
not concern him--but always about the characters. "Now, why does she say
that? Does she really mean it? Did she feel faint because of the heat of
the fire or of something in that paper?" He laughed loudly at all the
jokes and at some passages which did not seem humorous to Tony, asking
him to repeat them two or three times, and later at the description of
the sufferings of the outcasts in "Tom-all-alone's" tears ran down his
cheeks into his beard. His comments on the story were usually simple. "I
think the Dedlock is a very proud man," or, "Mrs Jellyby does not take
enough care of her children."

Tony enjoyed the readings almost as much as he did.

At the end of the first day the old man said, "You read beautifully,
with a far better accent than the black man. And you explain better. It
is almost as though my father were here again." And always at the end of
a session he thanked his guest courteously. "I enjoyed that _very_ much.
It was an extremely distressing chapter. But, if I remember it rightly,
it will all turn out well."

By the time that they were in the second volume, however, the novelty of
the old man's delight had begun to wane, and Tony was feeling strong
enough to be restless. He touched more than once on the subject of his
departure, asking about canoes and rains and the possibility of finding
guides. But Mr Todd seemed obtuse and paid no attention to these hints.

One day, running his thumb through the pages of _Bleak House_ that
remained to be read, Tony said, "We still have a lot to get through. I
hope I shall be able to finish it before I go."

"Oh yes," said Mr Todd. "Do not disturb yourself about that. You will
have time to finish it, my friend."

For the first time Tony noticed something slightly menacing in his
host's manner. That evening at supper, a brief meal of farine and dried
beef, eaten just before sundown, Tony renewed the subject.

"You know, Mr Todd, the time has come when I must be thinking about
getting back to civilization. I have already imposed myself on your
hospitality far too long."

Mr Todd bent over the plate, crunching mouthfuls of farine, but made no
reply.

"How soon do you think I shall be able to get a boat?... I said, how
soon do you think I shall be able to get a boat? I appreciate all your
kindness to me more than I can say, but..."

"My friend, any kindness I may have shown is amply repaid by your
reading of Dickens. Do not let us mention the subject again."

"Well, I'm very glad you have enjoyed it. I have, too. But I really must
be thinking of getting back..."

"Yes," said Mr Todd. "The black man was like that. He thought of it all
the time. But he died here..."

Twice during the next day Tony opened the subject, but his host was
evasive. Finally, he said, "Forgive me, Mr Todd, but I really must press
the point. When can I get a boat?"

"There is no boat."

"Well, the Indians can build one."

"You must wait for the rains. There is not enough water in the river
now."

"How long will that be?"

"A month... two months..."

They had finished _Bleak House_ and were nearing the end of _Dombey and
Son_ when the rain came.

"Now it is time to make preparations to go."

"Oh, that is impossible. The Indians will not make a boat during the
rainy season--it is one of their superstitions."

"You might have told me."

"Did I not mention it? I forgot."

Next morning Tony went out alone while his host was busy, and, looking
as aimless as he could, strolled across the savannah to the group of
Indian houses. There were four or five Pie-wies sitting in one of the
doorways. They did not look up as he approached them. He addressed them
in the few words of Macushi he had acquired during the journey but they
made no sign whether they understood him or not. Then he drew a sketch
of a canoe in the sand, he went through some vague motions of carpentry,
pointed from them to him, then made motions of giving something to them
and scratched out the outlines of a gun and a hat and a few other
recognizable articles of trade. One of the women giggled but no one gave
any sign of comprehension, and he went away unsatisfied.

At their mid-day meal Mr Todd said, "Mr Last, the Indians tell me that
you have been trying to speak with them. It is easier that you say
anything you wish through me. You realize, do you not, that they would
do nothing without my authority. They regard themselves, quite rightly
in many cases, as my children."

"Well, as a matter of fact, I was asking them about a canoe."

"So they gave me to understand... and now if you have finished your
meal perhaps we might have another chapter. I am quite absorbed in the
book."

                 *        *        *        *        *

They finished _Dombey and Son_. Nearly a year had passed since Tony had
left England, and his gloomy foreboding of permanent exile became
suddenly acute when, between the pages of _Martin Chuzzlewit_, he found
a document written in pencil in irregular characters.

    Year 1919.

    I James Todd of Brazil do swear to Barnabas Washington of
    Georgetown that if he finish this book in fact Martin Chuzzlewit
    I will let him go away back as soon as finished.

There followed a heavy pencil X and after it: _Mr Todd made this mark
signed Barnabas Washington_.

"Mr Todd," said Tony, "I must speak frankly. You saved my life, and when
I get back to civilization I will reward you to the best of my ability.
I will give you anything within reason. But at present you are keeping
me here against my will. I demand to be released."

"But, my friend, what is keeping you? You are under no restraint. Go
when you like."

"You know very well that I can't get away without your help."

"In that case you must humour an old man. Read me another chapter."

"Mr Todd, I swear by anything you like that when I get to Man?os I will
find someone to take my place. I will pay a man to read to you all day."

"But I have no need of another man. You read so well."

"I have read for the last time."

"I hope not," said Mr Todd politely.

That evening at supper only one plate of dried meat and farine was
brought in and Mr Todd ate alone. Tony lay without speaking, staring at
the thatch.

Next day at noon a single plate was put before Mr Todd but with it lay
his gun, cocked, on his knee, as he ate. Tony resumed the reading of
_Martin Chuzzlewit_ where it had been interrupted.

Weeks passed hopelessly. They read _Nicholas Nickleby_ and _Little
Dorrit_ and _Oliver Twist_. Then a stranger arrived in the savannah, a
half-caste prospector, one of that lonely order of men who wander for a
lifetime through the forests, tracing the little streams, sifting the
gravel and, ounce by ounce, filling the little leather sack of gold
dust, more often than not dying of exposure and starvation with five
hundred dollars worth of gold hung round their necks. Mr Todd was vexed
at his arrival, gave him farine and _tasso_ and sent him on his journey
within an hour of his arrival, but in that hour Tony had time to
scribble his name on a slip of paper and put it into the man's hand.

From now on there was hope. The days followed their unvarying routine;
coffee at sunrise, a morning of inaction while Mr Todd pottered about on
the business of the farm, farine and _tasso_ at noon, Dickens in the
afternoon, farine and _tasso_ and sometimes some fruit for supper,
silence from sunset to dawn with the small wick glowing in the beef fat
and the palm thatch overhead dimly discernible; but Tony lived in quiet
confidence and expectation.

Sometime, this year or the next, the prospector would arrive at a
Brazilian village with news of his discovery. The disasters of the
Messinger expedition would not have passed unnoticed. Tony could imagine
the headlines that must have appeared in the popular press; even now,
probably, there were search parties working over the country he had
crossed; any day English voices must sound over the savannah and a dozen
friendly adventurers come crashing through the bush. Even as he was
reading, while his lips mechanically followed the printed pages, his
mind wandered away from his eager, crazy host opposite, and he began to
narrate to himself incidents of his homecoming--the gradual
re-encounters with civilization (he shaved and bought new clothes at
Man?os, telegraphed for money, received wires of congratulation; he
enjoyed the leisurely river journey to Belem, the big liner to Europe;
savoured good claret and fresh meat and spring vegetables; he was shy at
meeting Brenda and uncertain how to address her... "_Darling_, you've
been much longer than you said. I quite thought you were lost...").

And then Mr Todd interrupted. "May I trouble you to read that passage
again? It is one I particularly enjoy."

The weeks passed; there was no sign of rescue but Tony endured the day
for hope of what might happen on the morrow; he even felt a slight
stirring of cordiality towards his jailer and was therefore quite
willing to join him when, one evening after a long conference with an
Indian neighbour he proposed a celebration.

"It is one of the local feast days," he explained, "and they have been
making _pivari_. You may not like it but you should try some. We will go
across to this man's home to-night."

Accordingly after supper they joined a party of Indians that were
assembled round the fire in one of the huts at the other side of the
savannah. They were singing in an apathetic, monotonous manner and
passing a large calabash of liquid from mouth to mouth. Separate bowls
were brought for Tony and Mr Todd, and they were given hammocks to sit
in.

"You must drink it all without lowering the cup. That is the etiquette."

Tony gulped the dark liquid, trying not to taste it. But it was not
unpleasant, hard and muddy on the palate like most of the beverages he
had been offered in Brazil, but with a flavour of honey and brown bread.
He leant back in the hammock feeling unusually contented. Perhaps at
that very moment the search party was in camp a few hours" journey from
them. Meanwhile he was warm and drowsy. The cadence of song rose and
fell interminably, liturgically. Another calabash of _pivari_ was
offered him and he handed it back empty. He lay full length watching the
play of shadows on the thatch as the Pie-wies began to dance. Then he
shut his eyes and thought of England and Hetton and fell asleep.

                 *        *        *        *        *

He awoke, still in the Indian hut, with the impression that he had
outslept his usual hour. By the position of the sun he knew it was late
afternoon. No one else was about. He looked for his watch and found to
his surprise that it was not on his wrist. He had left it in the house,
he supposed, before coming to the party.

"I must have been tight last night," he reflected. Treacherous drink
that." He had a headache and feared a recurrence of fever. He found when
he set his feet to the ground that he stood with difficulty; his walk
was unsteady and his mind confused as it had been during the first weeks
of his convalescence. On his way across the savannah he was obliged to
stop more than once, shutting his eyes and breathing deeply. When he
reached the house he found Mr Todd sitting there.

"Ah, my friend, you are late for the reading this afternoon. There is
scarcely another half hour of light. How do you feel?"

"Rotten. That drink doesn't seem to agree with me."

"I will give you something to make you better. The forest has remedies
for everything; to make you awake and to make you sleep."

"You haven't seen my watch anywhere?"

"You have missed it?"

"Yes. I thought I was wearing it. I say, I've never slept so long."

"Not since you were a baby. Do you know how long? Two days."

"Nonsense. I can't have."

"Yes, indeed. It is a long time. It is a pity because you missed our
guests."

"Guests?"

"Why, yes. I have been quite gay while you were asleep. Three men from
outside. Englishmen. It is a pity you missed them. A pity for them, too,
as they particularly wished to see you. But what could I do? You were so
sound asleep. They had come all the way to find you, so--I thought you
would not mind--as you could not greet them yourself, I gave them a
little souvenir, your watch. They wanted something to take back to
England where a reward is being offered for news of you. They were very
pleased with it. And they took some photographs of the little cross I
put up to commemorate your coming. They were pleased with that, too.
They were very easily pleased. But I do not suppose they will visit us
again, our life here is so retired... no pleasures except reading... I
do not suppose we shall ever have visitors again... well, well, I will
get you some medicine to make you feel better. Your head aches, does it
not?... We will not have any Dickens to-day... but to-morrow, and the
day after that, and the day after that. Let us read _Little Dorrit_
again. There are passages in that book I can never hear without the
temptation to weep."




CHAPTER VII
ENGLISH GOTHIC--III


A light breeze in the dewy orchards; brilliant, cool sunshine over
meadows and copses; the elms were all in bud in the avenue; everything
was early that year, for it had been a mild winter.

High overhead among its gargoyles and crockets the clock chimed for the
hour and solemnly struck fourteen. It was half-past eight. The clock has
been irregular lately. It was one of the things that Richard Last
intended to see to, when death duties were paid and silver foxes began
to show a profit.

Molly Last bowled up the drive on her two-stroke motor-cycle; there was
bran mash on her breeches and in her hair. She had been feeding the
Angora rabbits.

On the gravel in front of the house the new memorial stood, shrouded in
a flag. Molly propped the motor-cycle against the wall of the drawbridge
and ran in to breakfast.

Life at Hetton was busier but simpler since Richard Last's succession.
Ambrose remained, but there were no longer any footmen; he and a boy and
four women servants did the work of the house. Richard Last called them
his "skeleton staff". When things were easier he would extend the
household; meanwhile the dining-hall and the library were added to the
state apartments which were kept locked and shuttered; the family lived
in the morning-room, the smoking-room and what had been Tony's study.
Most of the kitchen quarters, too, were out of use; an up-to-date and
economical range had been installed in one of the pantries.

The family all appeared downstairs by half-past eight, except Agnes, who
took longer to dress and was usually some minutes late; Teddy and Molly
had been out for an hour, she among the rabbits, he to the silver foxes.
Teddy was twenty-two and lived at home. Peter was still at Oxford.

They breakfasted together in the morning-room. Mrs Last sat at one end
of the table, her husband at the other; there was a constant traffic
from hand to hand to and fro between them of cups, plates, honey-jars
and correspondence.

Mrs Last said, "Molly, you have rabbit-feed on your head again."

"Oh well, I shall have to tidy up anyway before the jamboree."

Mr Last said, "_Jamboree?_ Is nothing sacred to you children?"

Teddy said, "Another casualty at the stinkeries. That little vixen we
bought from the people at Okehampton got her brush bitten off during the
night. Must have got it through the wire into the next cage. Tricky
birds, foxes."

Agnes came next; she was a neat, circumspect child of twelve, with large
grave eyes behind her goggles. She kissed her father and mother and
said, "I'm sorry if I'm late."

"_If_ you're late..." said Mr Last tolerantly.

"How long will the show last?" asked Teddy. "I've got to run over to
Bayton and get some more rabbits for the foxes. Chivers says he's got
about fifty waiting for me. We can't shoot enough here. Greedy little
beggars."

"It will be all over by half-past eleven. Mr Tendril isn't going to
preach a sermon. It's just as well really. He's got it into his head
that Cousin Tony died in Afghanistan."

"There's a letter here from Cousin Brenda. She's very sorry but she
can't get down here for the dedication."

"Oh."

There was a general silence.

"She says that Jock has a three-line whip for this afternoon."

"Oh."

"She could have come without him," said Molly.

"She sends her love to us all and to Hetton."

There was another pause.

"Well, I think it's a jolly good thing," said Molly. "She couldn't show
much widowly grief. It didn't take her long to get hitched up again."

"_Molly!_"

"And you know you think the same."

"I will not allow you to talk like that about Cousin Brenda, whatever we
think. She had a perfect right to marry again and I hope she and Mr
Grant-Menzies are very happy."

"She was always jolly decent to us when she used to live here," said
Agnes.

"Well, I should hope so," said Teddy. "After all, it's our place."

                 *        *        *        *        *

The day was still fine at eleven o'clock, though the wind had got up,
fluttering the papers on which the order of the service was printed and
once threatening to unveil the memorial prematurely. Several relatives
were present, Lady St Cloud, Aunt Frances and the family of impoverished
Lasts who had not profited by Tony's disappearance. All the household
and estate servants were there, several tenants and most of the village;
there were also a dozen or so neighbours, among them Colonel
Inch--Richard Last and Teddy had hunted regularly that season with the
Pigstanton. Mr Tendril conducted the brief service in resonant tones
that were clearly audible above the blustering wind. When he pulled the
cord the flag fell away from the memorial without mishap.

It was a plain monolith of local stone, inscribed:

                         ANTHONY LAST OF HETTON
                                EXPLORER
                          Born at Hetton, 1902
                          Died in Brazil, 1934

When the local visitors had left and the relatives had gone into the
house to be shown the new labour-saving arrangements, Richard Last and
Lady St Cloud remained for a short time on the gravel.

"I'm glad we put that up," he said. "You know, I should never have
thought of it, if it had not been for a Mrs Beaver. She wrote to me as
soon as the news of Tony's death was published. I didn't know her at the
time. Of course we knew very few of Tony's friends."

"It was her suggestion?"

"Yes, she said that as one of Tony's closest friends she knew he would
wish to have some monument at Hetton. She was most considerate--even
offering to arrange with the contractors for it. Her own plans were more
ambitious. She proposed that we should have the chapel redecorated as a
chantry. But I think this is what he would have preferred. The stone
comes from one of our own quarries and was cut by the estate workmen."

"Yes, I think he would have preferred this," said Lady St Cloud.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Teddy had chosen Galahad for his bedroom. He disengaged himself from the
family and hurried up to change out of his dark clothes. Within ten
minutes he was in his car driving to Chivers' farm. Before luncheon he
was back with the rabbits. They were skinned and tied round the feet
into bundles of four.

"Coming to the stinkeries?" he asked Agnes.

"No, I'm looking after Cousin Frances. She got rather on mother's nerves
through crabbing the new boiler."

The silver-fox farm was behind the stables; a long double row of wire
cages; they had wire floors covered with earth and cinders to prevent
the animals digging their way out. They lived in pairs; some were
moderately tame but it was unwise to rely upon them. Teddy and Ben
Hacket--who helped with them--had been badly bitten more than once that
winter.

They ran up to the doors when they saw Teddy come with the rabbits. The
vixen who had lost her brush seemed little the worse for her accident.

Teddy surveyed his charges with pride and affection. It was by means of
them that he hoped one day to restore Hetton to the glory that it had
enjoyed in the days of his Cousin Tony.
