CHAPTER I
DU C?T? DE CHEZ BEAVER


"Was anyone hurt?"

"No one, I am thankful to say," said Mrs Beaver, "except two housemaids
who lost their heads and jumped through a glass roof into the paved
court. They were in no danger. The fire never reached the bedrooms, I am
afraid. Still, they are bound to need doing up, everything black with
smoke and drenched in water and luckily they had that old-fashioned sort
of extinguisher that ruins _everything_. One really cannot complain. The
chief rooms were _completely_ gutted and everything was insured. Sylvia
Newport knows the people. I must get on to them this morning before that
ghoul Mrs Shutter snaps them up."

Mrs Beaver stood with her back to the fire, eating her morning yoghourt.
She held the carton close under her chin and gobbled with a spoon.

"Heavens, how nasty this stuff is. I wish you'd take to it, John. You're
looking so tired lately. I don't know how I should get through my day
without it."

"But, mumsy, I haven't as much to do as you have."

"That's true, my son."

                 *        *        *        *        *

John Beaver lived with his mother at the house in Sussex Gardens where
they had moved after his father's death. There was little in it to
suggest the austerely elegant interiors which Mrs Beaver planned for her
customers. It was crowded with the unsaleable furniture of two larger
houses, without pretension to any period, least of all to the present.
The best pieces and those which had sentimental interest for Mrs Beaver
were in the L-shaped drawing-room upstairs.

Beaver had a dark little sitting-room (on the ground floor, behind the
dining-room) and his own telephone. The elderly parlourmaid looked after
his clothes. She also dusted, polished and maintained in symmetrical
order on his dressing table and on the top of his chest of drawers the
collection of sombre and bulky objects that had stood in his father's
dressing-room; indestructible presents for his wedding and twenty-first
birthday, ivory, brass bound, covered in pigskin, crested and gold
mounted, suggestive of expensive Edwardian masculinity--racing flasks
and hunting flasks, cigar cases, tobacco jars, jockeys, elaborate
meerschaum pipes, buttonhooks and hat brushes.

There were four servants, all female and all, save one, elderly.

When anyone asked Beaver why he stayed there instead of setting up on
his own, he sometimes said that he thought his mother liked having him
there (in spite of her business she was lonely); sometimes that it saved
him at least five pounds a week.

His total income varied around six pounds a week, so this was an
important saving.

He was twenty-five years old. From leaving Oxford until the beginning of
the slump he had worked in an advertising agency. Since then no one had
been able to find anything for him to do. So he got up late and sat near
his telephone most of the day, hoping to be rung up.

Whenever it was possible, Mrs Beaver took an hour off in the middle of
the morning. She was always at her shop punctually at nine, and by
half-past eleven she needed a break. Then, if no important customer was
imminent, she would get into her two-seater and drive home to Sussex
Gardens. Beaver was usually dressed by then and she had grown to value
their morning interchange of gossip.

"What was your evening?"

"Audrey rang up at eight and asked me to dinner. Ten of us at the
Embassy, rather dreary. Afterwards we all went on to a party given by a
woman called de Trommet."

"I know who you mean. American. She hasn't paid for the toile-de-jouy
chair covers we made her last April. I had a dull time too; didn't hold
a card all the evening and came away four pounds ten to the bad."

"Poor mumsy."

"I'm lunching at Viola Chasm's. What are you doing? I didn't order
anything here, I'm afraid."

"Nothing so far. I can always go round to Bratt's."

"But that's so expensive. I'm sure if we ask Chambers she'll be able to
get you something in. I thought you were certain to be out."

"Well, I still may be. It isn't twelve yet."

(Most of Beaver's invitations came to him at the last moment;
occasionally even later, when he had already begun to eat a solitary
meal from a tray... "John, darling, there's been a muddle and Sonia has
arrived without Reggie. Could you be an angel and help me out? Only be
quick, because we're going in now"... Then he would go headlong for a
taxi and arrive, with apologies, after the first course... One of his
few recent quarrels with his mother had occurred when he left a luncheon
party of hers in this way.)

"Where are you going for the week-end?"

"Hetton."

"Who's that? I forget."

"Tony Last."

"Yes, of course. She's lovely, he's rather a stick. I didn't know you
knew them."

"Well, I don't really. Tony asked me in Bratt's the other night. He may
have forgotten."

"Send a telegram and remind them. It is far better than ringing up. It
gives them less chance to make excuses. Send it to-morrow just before
you start. They owe me for a table."

"What's their dossier?"

"I used to see her quite a lot before she married. She was Brenda Rex,
Lord St Cloud's daughter, very fair, underwater look. People used to be
mad about her when she was a girl. Everyone thought she would marry Jock
Grant-Menzies at one time. Wasted on Tony Last, he's a prig. I should
say it was time she began to be bored. They've been married five or six
years. Quite well off but everything goes in keeping up the house. I've
never seen it but I've an idea it's huge and quite hideous. They've got
one child at least, perhaps more."

"Mumsy, you are wonderful. I believe you know about everyone."

"It's a great help. All a matter of paying attention while people are
talking."

Mrs Beaver smoked a cigarette and then drove back to her shop. An
American woman bought two patchwork quilts at thirty guineas each, Lady
Metroland telephoned about a bathroom ceiling, an unknown young man paid
cash for a cushion; in the intervals between these events, Mrs Beaver
was able to descend to the basement where two dispirited girls were
packing lampshades. It was cold down there in spite of a little oil
stove, and the walls were always damp. The girls were becoming quite
deft, she noticed with pleasure, particularly the shorter one who was
handling the crates like a man.

"That's the way," she said, "you are doing very nicely, Joyce. I'll soon
get you on to something more interesting."

"Thank you, Mrs Beaver."

They had better stay in the packing department for a bit, Mrs Beaver
decided; as long as they would stand it. They had neither of them enough
chic to work upstairs. Both had paid good premiums to learn Mrs Beaver's
art.

Beaver sat on beside his telephone. Once it rang and a voice said, "Mr
Beaver? Will you please hold the line, sir, Mrs Tipping would like to
speak to you."

The intervening silence was full of pleasant expectation. Mrs Tipping
had a luncheon party that day, he knew; they had spent some time
together the evening before and he had been particularly successful with
her. Someone had chucked...

"Oh, Mr Beaver, I _am_ so sorry to trouble you. I was wondering, could
you _possibly_ tell me the name of the young man you introduced to me
last night at Madame de Trommet's? The one with the reddish moustache. I
think he was in Parliament."

"I expect you mean Jock Grant-Menzies."

"Yes, that's the name. You don't by any chance know where I can find
him, do you?"

"He's in the book but I don't suppose he'll be at home now. You might be
able to get him at Bratt's at about one. He's almost always there."

"Jock Grant-Menzies, Bratt's Club. Thank you so _very_ much. It _is_
kind of you. I hope you will come and see me some day. _Good_-bye."

After that the telephone was silent.

At one o'clock Beaver despaired. He put on his overcoat, his gloves, his
bowler hat and with neatly rolled umbrella set off to his club, taking a
penny bus as far as the corner of Bond Street.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The air of antiquity pervading Bratt's, derived from its elegant
Georgian fa?ade, and finely panelled rooms, was entirely spurious, for
it was a club of recent origin, founded in the burst of bonhomie
immediately after the war. It was intended for young men, to be a place
where they could straddle across the fire and be jolly in the card-room
without incurring scowls from older members. But now these founders were
themselves passing into middle age; they were heavier, balder and redder
in the face than when they had been demobilized, but their joviality
persisted and it was their turn now to embarrass their successors,
deploring their lack of manly and gentlemanly qualities.

Six broad backs shut Beaver from the bar. He settled in one of the
armchairs in the outer room and turned over the pages of the _New
Yorker_, waiting until someone he knew should turn up.

Jock Grant-Menzies came upstairs. The men at the bar greeted him saying,
"Hullo, Jock old boy, what are you drinking?" or, more simply, "Well,
old boy?" He was too young to have fought in the war but these men
thought he was all right; they liked him far more than they did Beaver,
who, they thought, ought never to have got into the club at all. But
Jock stopped to talk to Beaver. "Well, old boy," he said. "What are you
drinking?"

"Nothing so far." Beaver looked at his watch. "But I think it's time I
had one. Brandy and ginger ale."

Jock called to the barman and then said:

"Who was the old girl you wished on me at that party last night?"

"She's called Mrs Tipping."

"I thought she might be. That explains it. They gave me a message
downstairs that someone with a name like that wanted me to lunch with
her."

"Are you going?"

"No, I'm no good at lunch parties. Besides, I decided when I got up that
I'd have oysters here."

The barman came with the drinks.

"Mr Beaver, sir, there's ten shillings against you in my books for last
month."

"Ah, thank you, Macdougal, remind me some time, will you?"

"Very good, sir."

Beaver said, "I'm going to Hetton to-morrow."

"Are you now? Give Tony and Brenda my love."

"What's the form?"

"Very quiet and enjoyable."

"No paper games?"

"Oh, no, nothing like that. A certain amount of bridge and backgammon
and low poker with the neighbours."

"Comfortable?"

"Not bad. Plenty to drink. Rather a shortage of bathrooms. You can stay
in bed all the morning."

"I've never met Brenda."

"You'll like her, she's a grand girl. I often think Tony Last's one of
the happiest men I know. He's got just enough money, loves the place,
one son he's crazy about, devoted wife, not a worry in the world."

"Most enviable. You don't know anyone else who's going, do you? I was
wondering if I could get a lift down there."

"I don't, I'm afraid. It's quite easy by train."

"Yes, but it's more pleasant by road."

"And cheaper."

"Yes, and cheaper I suppose... well, I'm going down to lunch. You won't
have another?"

Beaver rose to go.

"Yes, I think I will."

"Oh, all right. Macdougal. Two more, please."

Macdougal said, "Shall I book them to you, sir?"

"Yes, if you will."

Later, at the bar, Jock said, "I made Beaver pay for a drink."

"He can't have liked that."

"He nearly died of it. Know anything about pigs?"

"No. Why."

"Only that they keep writing to me about them from my constituency."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Beaver went downstairs but before going into the dining-room he told the
porter to ring up his home and see if there was any message for him.

"Mrs Tipping rang up a few minutes ago and asked whether you could come
to luncheon with her to-day."

"Will you ring her up and say that I shall be delighted to, but that I
may be a few minutes late?"

It was just after half-past one when he left Bratt's and walked at a
good pace towards Hill Street.




CHAPTER II
ENGLISH GOTHIC


[I]

_Between the villages of Hetton and Compton Last lies the
extensive park of Hetton Abbey. This, formerly one of the notable houses
of the county, was entirely rebuilt in 1864 in the Gothic style and is
now devoid of interest. The grounds are open to the public daily until
sunset and the house may be viewed on application by writing. It
contains some good portraits and furniture. The terrace commands a fine
view._

This passage from the county Guide Book did not cause Tony Last any
serious annoyance. Unkinder things had been said. His Aunt Frances,
embittered by an upbringing of unremitting severity, remarked that the
plans of the house must have been adapted by Mr Pecksniff from one of
his pupils" designs for an orphanage. But there was not a glazed brick
or encaustic tile that was not dear to Tony's heart. In some ways, he
knew, it was not convenient to run; but what big house was? It was not
altogether amenable to modern ideas of comfort; he had many small
improvements in mind, which would be put into effect as soon as the
death duties were paid off. But the general aspect and atmosphere of the
place; the line of its battlements against the sky; the central clock
tower where quarterly chimes disturbed all but the heaviest sleepers;
the ecclesiastical gloom of the great hall, its ceiling groined and
painted in diapers of red and gold, supported on shafts of polished
granite with vine-wreathed capitals, half-lit by day through lancet
windows of armorial stained glass, at night by a vast gasolier of brass
and wrought iron, wired now and fitted with twenty electric bulbs; the
blasts of hot air that rose suddenly at one's feet, through grills of
cast-iron trefoils from the antiquated heating apparatus below; the
cavernous chill of the more remote corridors where, economizing in coke,
he had had the pipes shut off; the dining-hall with its hammer-beam roof
and pitch-pine minstrels" gallery; the bedrooms with their brass
bedsteads, each with a frieze of Gothic text, each named from Malory,
Yseult, Elaine, Mordred and Merlin, Gawaine and Bedivere, Lancelot,
Perceval, Tristram, Galahad, his own dressing-room, Morgan le Fay, and
Brenda's Guinevere, where the bed stood on a dais, the walls were hung
with tapestry, the fireplace was like a tomb of the thirteenth century,
from whose bay window one could count, on days of exceptional clearness,
the spires of six churches--all these things with which he had grown up
were a source of constant delight and exultation to Tony; things of
tender memory and proud possession.

They were not in the fashion, he fully realized. Twenty years ago people
had liked half timber and old pewter; now it was urns and colonnades;
but the time would come, perhaps in John Andrew's day, when opinion
would reinstate Hetton in its proper place. Already it was referred to
as "amusing", and a very civil young man had asked permission to
photograph it for an architectural review.

                 *        *        *        *        *

The ceiling of Morgan le Fay was not in perfect repair. In order to make
an appearance of coffered wood, moulded slats had been nailed in a
chequer across the plaster. They were painted in chevrons of blue and
gold. The squares between were decorated alternately with Tudor roses
and fleurs-de-lis. But damp had penetrated into one corner, leaving a
large patch where the gilt had tarnished and the colour flaked away; in
another place the wooden laths had become warped and separated from the
plaster. Lying in bed, in the grave ten minutes between waking and
ringing, Tony studied these defects and resolved anew to have them put
right. He wondered whether it would be easy, nowadays, to find craftsmen
capable of such delicate work.

Morgan le Fay had been his room since he left the night-nursery. He had
been put there so that he would be within calling distance of his
parents (inseparable in Guinevere), for until quite late in his life he
was subject to nightmares. He had taken nothing from the room since he
had slept there, but every year added to its contents, so that it now
formed a gallery representative of every phase of his adolescence--the
framed picture of a dreadnought (a coloured supplement from _Chums_),
all its guns spouting flame and smoke; a photographic group of his
private school; a cabinet called "the Museum", filled with the fruits of
a dozen desultory hobbies, eggs, butterflies, fossils, coins; his
parents, in the leather diptych which had stood by his bed at school;
Brenda, eight years ago when he had been trying to get engaged to her;
Brenda with John, taken just after the christening; an aquatint of
Hetton, as it had stood until his great-grandfather demolished it; some
shelves of books, _Bevis_, _Woodwork at Home_, _Conjuring for All_, _The
Young Visiters_, _The Law of Landlord and Tenant_, _Farewell to Arms_.

                 *        *        *        *        *

All over England people were waking up, queasy and despondent. Tony lay
for ten minutes very happily planning the renovation of his ceiling.
Then he rang the bell.

"Has her ladyship been called yet?"

"About a quarter of an hour ago, sir."

"Then I'll have breakfast in her room."

He put on his dressing-gown and slippers and went through into
Guinevere.

Brenda lay on the dais.

She had insisted on a modern bed. Her tray was beside her and the quilt
was littered with envelopes, letters and the daily papers. Her head was
propped against a very small blue pillow; clean of make-up, her face was
almost colourless, rose-pearl, scarcely deeper in tone than her arms and
neck.

"Well?" said Tony.

"Kiss."

He sat by the tray at the head of the bed; she leant forward to him (a
nereid emerging from fathomless depths of clear water). She turned her
lips away and rubbed against his cheek like a cat. It was a way she had.

"Anything interesting?"

He picked up some of the letters.

"No. Mama wants nanny to send John's measurements. She's knitting him
something for Christmas. And the mayor wants me to open something next
month. I needn't, need I?"

"I think you'd better, we haven't done anything for him for a long
time."

"Well, you must write the speech. I'm getting too old for the girlish
one I used to give them all. And Angela says, will we stay for the New
Year?"

"That's easy. Not on her life, we won't."

"I guessed not... though it sounds an amusing party."

"You go if you like. I can't possibly get away."

"That's all right. I knew it would be "no" before I opened the letter."

"Well, what sort of pleasure can there be in going all the way to
Yorkshire in the middle of winter?"

"Darling, don't be cross. I know we aren't going. I'm not making a thing
about it. I just thought it might be fun to eat someone else's food for
a bit."

Then Brenda's maid brought in the other tray. He had it put by the
window seat, and began opening his letters. He looked out of the window.
Only four of the six church towers were visible that morning. Presently
he said, "As a matter of fact I probably _can_ manage to get away that
week-end."

"Darling, are you sure you wouldn't hate it?"

"I daresay not."

While he ate his breakfast Brenda read to him from the papers. "Reggie's
been making another speech... There's such an extraordinary picture of
Babe and Jock... a woman in America has had twins by two different
husbands. Would you have thought that possible?... Two more chaps in
gas ovens... a little girl has been strangled in a cemetery with a
bootlace... that play we went to about a farm is coming off." Then she
read him the serial. He lit his pipe. "I don't believe you're listening.
Why doesn't Sylvia want Rupert to get the letter?"

"Eh? Oh well, you see, she doesn't really trust Rupert."

"I _knew_ it. There's no such character as Rupert in the story. I shall
never read to you again."

"Well, to tell you the truth I was just thinking."

"Oh."

"I was thinking how delightful it is, that it's Saturday morning and we
haven't got anyone coming for the week-end."

"Oh, you thought that?"

"Don't you?"

"Well, it sometimes seems to me rather pointless keeping up a house this
size if we don't now and then ask some other people to stay in it."

"_Pointless?_ I can't think what you mean. I don't keep up this house to
be a hostel for a lot of bores to come and gossip in. We've always lived
here and I hope John will be able to keep it on after me. One has a duty
towards one's employees, and towards the place too. It's a definite part
of English life which would be a serious loss if..." Then Tony stopped
short in his speech and looked at the bed. Brenda had turned on her face
and only the top of her head appeared above the sheets.

"Oh God," she said into the pillow. "What have I done?"

"I say, am I being pompous again?"

She turned sideways so that her nose and one eye emerged. "Oh no,
darling, not _pompous_. You wouldn't know how."

"Sorry."

Brenda sat up. "And, please, I didn't mean it. I'm jolly glad too, that
no one's coming."

(These scenes of domestic playfulness had been more or less continuous
in Tony and Brenda's life for seven years.)

Outside, it was soft English weather; mist in the hollows and pale
sunshine on the hills; the coverts had ceased dripping, for there were
no leaves to hold the recent rain, but the undergrowth was wet, dark in
the shadows, iridescent where the sun caught it; the lanes were soggy
and there was water running in the ditches.

John Andrew sat his pony, solemn and stiff as a Lifeguard, while Ben
fixed the jump. Thunderclap had been a present on his sixth birthday
from Uncle Reggie. It was John who had named her, after lengthy
consultation. Originally she had been called Christabelle which, as Ben
said, was more the name for a hound than a horse. Ben had known a
strawberry roan called Thunderclap who killed two riders and won the
local point-to-point four years running. He had been a lovely little
horse, said Ben, till he staked himself in the guts, hunting, and had to
be shot. Ben knew stories about a great many different horses. There was
one called Zero on whom he had won five Jimmy-o-goblins at ten to three
at Chester one year. And there was a mule he had known during the war,
called Peppermint, who had died of drinking the company's rum ration.
But John was not going to name his pony after a drunken mule. So in the
end they had decided on Thunderclap, in spite of her imperturbable
disposition.

She was a dark bay, with long tail and mane. Ben had left her legs
shaggy. She cropped the grass, resisting John's attempts to keep her
head up.

Before her arrival riding had been a very different thing. He had jogged
round the paddock on a little Shetland pony called Bunny, with his nurse
panting at the bridle. Now it was a man's business. Nanny sat at a
distance, crocheting, on her camp stool; out of earshot. There had been
a corresponding promotion in Ben's position. From being the hand who
looked after the farm horses, he was now, perceptibly, assuming the air
of a stud groom. The handkerchief round his neck gave place to a stock
with a fox-head pin. He was a man of varied experience in other parts of
the country.

Neither Tony nor Brenda hunted but they were anxious that John should
like it. Ben foresaw the time when the stables would be full and himself
in authority; it would not be like Mr Last to get anyone in from
outside.

Ben had got two posts bored for iron pegs, and a white-washed rail. With
these he erected a two-foot jump in the middle of the field.

"Now take it quite easy. Canter up slow and when she takes off lean
forward in the saddle and you'll be over like a bird. Keep her head
straight at it."

Thunderclap trotted forwards, cantered two paces, thought better of it
and, just before the jump, fell into a trot again and swerved round the
obstacle. John recovered his balance by dropping the reins and gripping
the mane with both hands; he looked guiltily at Ben, who said, "What
d'you suppose your bloody legs are for? Here, take this and just give
her a tap when you get up to it!" He handed John a switch.

Nanny sat by the gate re-reading a letter from her sister.

John took Thunderclap back and tried the jump again. This time they made
straight for the rail.

Ben shouted "Legs!" and John kicked sturdily, losing his stirrups. Ben
raised his arms as if scaring crows. Thunderclap jumped; John rose from
the saddle and landed on his back in the grass.

Nanny rose in alarm. "Oh, what's happened, Mr Hacket, is he hurt?"

"He's all right," said Ben.

"I'm all right," said John, "I think she put in a short step."

"Short step my grandmother. You just opened your bloody legs and took an
arser. Keep hold on to the reins next time. You can lose a hunt that
way."

At the third attempt John got over and found himself breathless and
insecure, one stirrup swinging loose and one hand grabbing its old
support in the mane, but still in the saddle.

"There, how did that feel? You just skimmed over like a swallow. Try it
again?"

Twice more John and Thunderclap went over the little rail, then nanny
called that it was time to go indoors for his milk. They walked the pony
back to the stable. Nanny said, "Oh dear, look at all the mud on your
coat."

Ben said, "We'll have you riding the winner at Aintree soon."

"Good morning, Mr Hacket."

"Good morning, miss."

"Good-bye, Ben, may I come and see you doing the farm horses this
evening?"

"That's not for me to say. You must ask nanny. Tell you what though, the
grey carthorse has got worms. Would you like to see me give him a pill?"

"Oh yes; please, nanny, may I?"

"You must ask mother. Come along now, you've had quite enough of horses
for one day."

"Can't have enough of horses," said John, "ever." On the way back to the
house he said, "Can I have my milk in mummy's room?"

"That depends."

Nanny's replies were always evasive, like that--"We'll see" or "That's
asking" or "Those that ask no questions hear no lies"--altogether unlike
Ben's decisive and pungent judgments.

"What does it depend on?"

"Lots of things."

"Tell me one of them."

"On your not asking a lot of silly questions."

"Silly old tart."

"_John!_ How dare you? What do you mean?"

Delighted by the effect of this sally, John broke away from her hand and
danced in front of her, saying, "Silly old tart, silly old tart" all the
way to the side entrance. When they entered the porch his nurse silently
took off his leggings; he was sobered a little by her grimness.

"Go straight up to the nursery," she said. "I am going to speak to your
mother about you."

"Please, nanny. I don't know what it means, but I didn't mean it."

"Go straight to the nursery."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda was doing her face.

"It's been the same ever since Ben Hacket started teaching him to ride,
my lady, there's been no doing anything with him."

Brenda spat in the eye-black. "But, nanny, what exactly did he say?"

"Oh, I couldn't repeat it, my lady."

"Nonsense, you must tell me. Otherwise I shall be thinking it something
far worse than it was."

"It couldn't have been worse... he called me a silly old tart, my
lady."

Brenda choked slightly into her face towel. "He said _that_?"

"Repeatedly. He danced in front of me all the way up the drive, _singing
it_."

"I see... well, you were quite right to tell me."

"Thank you, my lady, and since we are talking about it I think I ought
to say that it seems to me that Ben Hacket is making the child go ahead
far too quickly with his riding. It's very dangerous. He had what might
have been a serious fall this morning."

"All right, nanny, I'll speak to Mr Last about it."

She spoke to Tony. They both laughed about it a great deal. "Darling,"
she said, "_you_ must speak to him. You're so much better at being
serious than I am."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"I should have thought it was very nice to be called a tart," John
argued, "and anyway it's a word Ben often uses about people."

"Well, he's got no business to."

"I like Ben more than anyone in the world. And I should think he's
cleverer too."

"Now, you know you don't like him more than your mother."

"Yes I do. _Far_ more."

Tony felt that the time had come to cut out the cross talk and deliver
the homily he had been preparing. "Now listen, John. It was very wrong
of you to call nanny a silly old tart. First, because it was unkind to
her. Think of all the things she does for you every day."

"She's paid to."

"Be quiet. And secondly, because you were using a word which people of
your age and class do not use. Poor people use certain expressions which
gentlemen do not. You are a gentleman. When you grow up all this house
and lots of other things besides will belong to you. You must learn to
speak like someone who is going to have these things and to be
considerate to people less fortunate than you, particularly women. Do
you understand?"

"Is Ben less fortunate than me?"

"That has nothing to do with it. Now you are to go upstairs and say you
are sorry to nanny and promise never to use that word about anyone
again."

"All right."

"And because you have been so naughty to-day you are not to ride
to-morrow."

"To-morrow's Sunday."

"Well, next day then."

"But you said "to-morrow". It isn't fair to change now."

"John, don't argue. If you are not careful I shall send Thunderclap back
to Uncle Reggie and say that I find you are not a good enough boy to
keep it. You wouldn't like that, would you?"

"What would Uncle Reggie do with her? She couldn't carry him. Besides,
he's usually abroad."

"He'd give her to some other little boy. Anyway, that's got nothing to
do with it. Now run off and say you're sorry to nanny."

At the door John said, "It's all right riding on Monday, isn't it? You
did _say_ "to-morrow"."

"Yes, I suppose so."

"Hooray. Thunderclap went very well to-day. We jumped a big post and
rail. She refused first time but went like a bird after that."

"Didn't you come off?"

"Yes, once. It wasn't Thunderclap's fault. I just opened my bloody legs
and cut an arser."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"How did the lecture go?" Brenda asked.

"Bad. Rotten bad."

"The trouble is that nanny's jealous of Ben."

"I'm not sure we shan't both be soon."

They lunched at a small, round table in the centre of the dining-hall.
There seemed no way of securing an even temperature in that room; even
when one side was painfully roasting in the direct blaze of the open
hearth, the other was numbed by a dozen converging draughts. Brenda had
tried numerous experiments with screens and a portable electric
radiator, but with little success. Even to-day, mild elsewhere, it was
bitterly cold in the dining-hall.

Although they were both in good health and of unexceptional figure, Tony
and Brenda were on a diet. It gave an interest to their meals and saved
them from the two uncivilized extremes of which solitary diners are in
danger--absorbing gluttony or an irregular r?gime of scrambled eggs and
raw beef sandwiches. Under their present system they denied themselves
the combination of protein and starch at the same meal. They had a
printed catalogue telling them which foods contained protein and which
starch. Most normal dishes seemed to be compact of both, so that it was
fun for Tony and Brenda to choose the menu. Usually it ended by their
declaring some food "joker".

"I'm sure it does me a great deal of good."

"Yes, darling, and when we get tired of it we might try an alphabetical
diet, having things beginning with a different letter every day. J would
be hungry, nothing but jam and jellied eels... What are your plans for
the afternoon?"

"Nothing much. Carter's coming up at five to go over a few things. I may
go to Pigstanton after luncheon. I think we've got a tenant for Lowater
Farm but it's been empty some time and I ought to see how much needs
doing to it."

"I wouldn't say "no" to going in to the "movies"."

"All right. I can easily leave Lowater till Monday."

"And we might go to Woolworth's afterwards, eh?"

What with Brenda's pretty ways and Tony's good sense, it was not
surprising that their friends pointed to them as a pair who were
pre-eminently successful in solving the problem of getting along well
together.

The pudding, without protein, was unattractive.

Five minutes afterwards a telegram was brought in. Tony opened it and
said "Hell."

"Badders?"

"Something too horrible has happened. Look at this."

Brenda read. "_Arriving 3.18 so looking forward visit. Beaver._" And
asked, "What's Beaver?"

"It's a young man."

"That sounds all right."

"Oh no it's not. Wait till you see him."

"What's he coming here for? Did you ask him to stay?"

"I suppose I did in a vague kind of way. I went to Bratt's one evening
and he was the only chap there so we had some drinks and he said
something about wanting to see the house..."

"I suppose you were tight."

"Not really, but I never thought he'd hold it against me."

"Well, it jolly well serves you right. That's what comes of going up to
London on business and leaving me alone here... Who is he anyway?"

"Just a young man. His mother keeps that shop."

"I used to know her. She's hell. Come to think of it we owe her some
money."

"Look here, we must put a call through and say we're ill."

"Too late, he's in the train now, recklessly mixing starch and protein
in the Great Western three and sixpenny lunch... Anyway, he can go into
Galahad. No one who sleeps there ever comes again--the bed's agony I
believe."

"What on earth are we going to do with him? It's too late to get anyone
else."

"You go over to Pigstanton. I'll look after him. It's easier alone. We
can take him to the movies to-night, and to-morrow he can see over the
house. If we're lucky he may go up by the evening train. Does he have to
work on Monday morning?"

"I shouldn't know."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Three-eighteen was far from being the most convenient time for arrival.
One reached the house at about a quarter to four and if, like Beaver,
one was a stranger, there was an awkward time until tea; but without
Tony there to make her self-conscious, Brenda could carry these things
off quite gracefully and Beaver was so seldom wholly welcome anywhere
that he was not sensitive to the slight constraint of his reception.

She met him in what was still called the smoking-room; it was in some
ways the least gloomy place in the house. She said, "It is nice that you
were able to come. I must break it to you at once that we haven't got a
party. I'm afraid you'll be terribly bored... Tony had to go out but
he'll be in soon... was the train crowded? It often is on Saturdays...
would you like to come outside? It'll be dark soon and we might get some
of the sun while we can..." and so on. If Tony had been there it would
have been difficult, for she would have caught his eye and her manner as
ch?telaine would have collapsed. Beaver was well used to making
conversation, so they went out together through the french windows on to
the terrace, down the steps, into the Dutch garden, and back round the
orangery without suffering a moment's real embarrassment. She even heard
herself telling Beaver that his mother was one of her oldest friends.

Tony returned in time for tea. He apologized for not being at home to
greet his guest and almost immediately went out again to interview the
agent in his study.

Brenda asked about London and what parties there were. Beaver was
particularly knowledgeable.

"Polly Cockpurse is having one soon."

"Yes, I know."

"Are you coming up for it?"

"I don't expect so. We never go anywhere nowadays."

The jokes that had been going round for six weeks were all new to
Brenda; they had become polished and perfected with repetition and
Beaver was able to bring them out with good effect. He told her of
numerous changes of alliance among her friends.

"What's happening to Mary and Simon?"

"Oh, didn't you know? That's broken up."

"When?"

"It began in Austria this summer..."

"And Billy Angmering?"

"He's having a terrific walk out with a girl called Sheila Shrub."

"And the Helm-Hubbards?"

"That marriage isn't going too well either... Daisy has started a new
restaurant. It's going very well... and there's a new night club called
the Warren..."

"Dear me," Brenda said at last. "What fun everyone seems to be having."

After tea John Andrew was brought in and quickly usurped the
conversation. "How do you do?" he said. "I didn't know you were coming.
Daddy said he had a week-end to himself for once. Do you hunt?"

"Not for a long time."

"Ben says it stands to reason everyone ought to hunt who can afford to,
for the good of the country."

"Perhaps I can't afford to."

"Are you poor?"

"Please, Mr Beaver, you mustn't let him bore you."

"Yes, very poor."

"Poor enough to call people tarts?"

"Yes, quite poor enough."

"How did you get poor?"

"I always have been."

"Oh." John lost interest in this topic. "The grey horse at the farm has
got worms."

"How do you know?"

"Ben says so. Besides, you've only got to look at his dung."

"Oh dear," said Brenda, "what would nanny say if she heard you talking
like that?"

"How old are you?"

"Twenty-five. How old are you?"

"What do you do?"

"Nothing much."

"Well, if I was you I'd do something and earn some money. Then you'd be
able to hunt."

"But I shouldn't be able to call people tarts."

"I don't see any point in that anyway."

(Later, in the nursery, while he was having his supper, John said: "I
think Mr Beaver's a very silly man, don't you?"

"I'm sure I don't know," said nanny.

"I think he's the silliest man who's ever been here."

"Comparisons are odious."

"There just isn't anything nice about him. He's got a silly voice and a
silly face, silly eyes and silly nose," John's voice fell into a
liturgical sing-song, "silly feet and silly toes, silly head and silly
clothes..."

"Now you eat up your supper," said nanny.)

                 *        *        *        *        *

That evening before dinner Tony came up behind Brenda as she sat at her
dressing table and made a face over her shoulder in the glass.

"I feel rather guilty about Beaver--going off and leaving you like that.
You were heavenly to him."

She said, "Oh, it wasn't bad really. He's rather pathetic."

Farther down the passage Beaver examined his room, with the care of an
experienced guest. There was no reading lamp. The inkpot was dry. The
fire had been lit but had gone out. The bathroom, he had already
discovered, was a great distance away, up a flight of turret steps. He
did not at all like the look or feel of the bed; the springs were broken
in the centre and it creaked ominously when he lay down to try it. The
return ticket, third-class, had been eighteen shillings. Then there
would be tips.

Owing to Tony's feeling of guilt they had champagne for dinner, which
neither he nor Brenda particularly liked. Nor, as it happened, did
Beaver, but he was glad that it was there. It was decanted into a tall
jug and was carried round the little table, between the three of them,
as a pledge of hospitality. Afterwards they drove into Pigstanton to the
Picture-drome, where there was a film Beaver had seen some months
before. When they got back there was a grog tray and some sandwiches in
the smoking-room. They talked about the film but Beaver did not let on
that he had seen it. Tony took him to the door of Sir Galahad.

"I hope you sleep well."

"I'm sure I shall."

"D'you like to be called in the morning?"

"May I ring?"

"Certainly. Got everything you want?"

"Yes, thanks. Good night."

"Good night."

But when he got back he said, "You know, I feel awful about Beaver."

"Oh, Beaver's all right," said Brenda.

But he was far from being comfortable and as he rolled patiently about
the bed in quest of a position in which it was possible to go to sleep,
he reflected that, since he had no intention of coming to the house
again, he would give the butler nothing and only five shillings to the
footman who was looking after him. Presently he adapted himself to the
rugged topography of the mattress and dozed, fitfully, until morning.
But the new day began dismally with the information that all the Sunday
papers had already gone to her ladyship's room.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Tony invariably wore a dark suit on Sundays and a stiff white collar. He
went to church, where he sat in a large pitch-pine pew, put in by his
great-grandfather at the time of rebuilding the house, furnished with
very high crimson hassocks and a fireplace, complete with iron grate and
a little poker which his father used to rattle when any point in the
sermon excited his disapproval. Since his father's day a fire had not
been laid there; Tony had it in mind to revive the practice next winter.
On Christmas Day and Harvest Thanksgiving Tony read the lessons from the
back of the brass eagle.

When service was over he stood for a few minutes at the porch chatting
affably with the vicar's sister and the people from the village. Then he
returned home by a path across the fields which led to a side door in
the walled garden; he visited the hothouses and picked himself a
buttonhole, stopped by the gardeners' cottages for a few words (the
smell of Sunday dinners rising warm and overpowering from the little
doorways) and then, rather solemnly, drank a glass of sherry in the
library. That was the simple, mildly ceremonious order of his Sunday
morning, which had evolved, more or less spontaneously, from the more
severe practices of his parents; he adhered to it with great
satisfaction. Brenda teased him whenever she caught him posing as an
upright, God-fearing gentleman of the old school and Tony saw the joke,
but this did not at all diminish the pleasure he derived from his weekly
routine, or his annoyance when the presence of guests suspended it.

For this reason his heart sank when, emerging from his study into the
great hall at a quarter to eleven, he met Beaver already dressed and
prepared to be entertained; it was only a momentary vexation, however,
for while he wished him good morning he noticed that his guest had an
_A.B.C._ in his hands and was clearly looking out a train.

"I hope you slept all right?"

"Beautifully," said Beaver, though his wan expression did not confirm
the word.

"I'm so glad. I always sleep well here myself. I say, I don't like the
look of that train guide. I hope you weren't thinking of leaving us
yet?"

"Alas, I've got to get up to-night, I'm afraid."

"Too bad. I've hardly seen you. The trains aren't very good on Sundays.
The best leaves at five-forty-five and gets up about nine. It stops a
lot and there's no restaurant car."

"That'll do fine."

"Sure you can't stay until to-morrow?"

"Quite sure."

The church bells were ringing across the park.

"Well, I'm just off to church. I don't suppose you'd care to come."

Beaver always did what was expected of him when he was staying away,
even on a visit as unsatisfactory as the present one. "Oh yes, I should
like to very much."

"No, really, I shouldn't if I were you. You wouldn't enjoy it. I only go
because I more or less have to. You stay here. Brenda will be down
directly. Ring for a drink when you feel like it."

"Oh, all right."

"See you later then." Tony took his hat and stick from the lobby and let
himself out. "Now I've behaved inhospitably to that young man again," he
reflected.

The bells were clear and clamorous in the drive and Tony walked briskly
towards them. Presently they ceased and gave place to a single note,
warning the village that there was only five minutes to go before the
organist started the first hymn.

He caught up nanny and John, also on their way to church. John was in
one of his rare, confidential moods; he put his small gloved hand into
Tony's and, without introduction, embarked upon a story which lasted
them all the way to the church door; it dealt with the mule Peppermint
who had drunk the company's rum ration, near Wipers in 1917; it was told
breathlessly, as John trotted to keep pace with his father. At the end,
Tony said, "How very sad."

"Well, _I_ thought it was sad too, but it isn't. Ben said it made him
laugh fit to bust his pants."

The bell had stopped and the organist was watching from behind his
curtain for Tony's arrival. He walked ahead up the aisle, nanny and John
following. In the pew he occupied one of the armchairs; they sat on the
bench at his back. He leant forward for half a minute with his forehead
on his hand, and as he sat back, the organist played the first bars of
the hymn, "Enter not into judgment with Thy servant, O Lord..." The
service followed its course. As Tony inhaled the agreeable, slightly
musty atmosphere and performed the familiar motions of sitting, standing
and leaning forward, his thoughts drifted from subject to subject, among
the events of the past week and his plans for the future. Occasionally
some arresting phrase in the liturgy would recall him to his
surroundings, but for the most part that morning he occupied himself
with the question of bathrooms and lavatories, and of how more of them
could best be introduced without disturbing the character of his house.

The village postmaster took round the collecting bag. Tony put in his
half-crown; John and nanny their pennies.

The vicar climbed, with some effort, into the pulpit. He was an elderly
man who had served in India most of his life. Tony's father had given
him the living at the instance of his dentist. He had a noble and
sonorous voice and was reckoned the best preacher for many miles around.

His sermons had been composed in his more active days for delivery at
the garrison chapel; he had done nothing to adapt them to the changed
conditions of his ministry and they mostly concluded with some reference
to homes and dear ones far away. The villagers did not find this in any
way surprising. Few of the things said in church seemed to have any
particular reference to themselves. They enjoyed their vicar's sermons
very much and they knew that when he began about their distant homes, it
was time to be dusting their knees and feeling for their umbrellas.

"...And so as we stand here bareheaded at this solemn hour of the
week," he read, his powerful old voice swelling up for peroration, "let
us remember our Gracious Queen Empress in whose service we are here, and
pray that she may long be spared to send us at her bidding to do our
duty in the uttermost parts of the earth; and let us think of our dear
ones far away and the homes we have left in her name, and remember that
though miles of barren continent and leagues of ocean divide us, we are
never so near to them as on these Sunday mornings, united with them
across dune and mountain in our loyalty to our sovereign and
thanksgiving for her welfare; one with them as proud subjects of her
sceptre and crown."

("The Reverend Tendril "e do speak uncommon "igh of the Queen," a
gardener's wife had once remarked to Tony.)

After the choir had filed out, during the last hymn, the congregation
crouched silently for a few seconds and then made for the door. There
was no sign of recognition until they were outside among the graves;
then there was an exchange of greetings, solicitous, cordial, garrulous.

Tony spoke to the vet's wife and Mr Partridge from the shop; then he was
joined by the vicar.

"Lady Brenda is not ill, I hope?"

"No, nothing serious." This was the invariable formula when he appeared
at church without her. "A most interesting sermon, Vicar."

"My dear boy, I'm delighted to hear you say so. It is one of my
favourites. But have you never heard it before?"

"No, I assure you."

"I haven't used it here lately. When I am asked to supply elsewhere it
is the one I invariably choose. Let me see now, I always make a note of
the times I use it." The old clergyman opened the manuscript book he was
carrying. It had a limp black cover and the pages were yellow with age.
"Ah yes, here we are. I preached it first in Jellalabad when the
Coldstream Guards were there; then I used it in the Red Sea coming home
from my fourth leave; then at Sidmouth... Mentone... Winchester... to
the Girl Guides at their summer rally in 1921... the Church Stage Guild
at Leicester... twice at Bournemouth during the winter of 1926 when
poor Ada was so ill... No, I don't seem to have used it here since
1911, when you would have been too young to enjoy it..."

The vicar's sister had engaged John in conversation. He was telling
her the story of Peppermint: "...he'd have been all right, Ben says,
if he had been able to cat the rum up, but mules can't cat, neither
can horses..."

Nanny grasped him firmly and hurried him towards home. "How many times
have I told you not to go repeating whatever Ben Hacket tells you? Miss
Tendril didn't want to hear about Peppermint. And don't ever use that
rude word "cat" again."

"It only means to be sick."

"Well, Miss Tendril isn't interested in being sick..."

As the gathering between porch and lychgate began to disperse, Tony set
off towards the gardens. There was a good choice of buttonholes in the
hothouses; he picked lemon carnations with crinkled, crimson edges for
himself and Beaver and a camellia for his wife.

Shafts of November sunshine streamed down from lancet and oriel,
tinctured in green and gold, gules and azure by the emblazoned coats,
broken by the leaded devices into countless points and patches of
coloured light. Brenda descended the great staircase step by step
through alternations of dusk and rainbow. Both hands were occupied,
holding to her breast a bag, a small hat, a half-finished panel of
petit-point embroidery and a vast, disordered sheaf of Sunday
newspapers, above which only her eyes and forehead appeared as though
over a yashmak. Beaver emerged from the shadows below and stood at the
foot of the stairs looking up at her.

"I say, can't I carry something?"

"No thanks, I've got everything safe. How did you sleep?"

"Beautifully."

"I bet you didn't."

"Well, I'm not a very good sleeper."

"Next time you come you shall have a different room. But I daresay you
won't ever come again. People so seldom do. It is very sad because it's
such fun for us having them and we never make any new friends living
down here."

"Tony's gone to church."

"Yes, he likes that. He'll be back soon. Let's go out for a minute or
two, it looks lovely."

When Tony came back they were sitting in the library. Beaver was telling
Brenda's fortune with cards. "... Now cut to me again," he was saying,
"and I'll see if it's any clearer... Oh yes... there is going to be a
sudden death which will cause you great pleasure and profit. In fact you
are going to kill someone. I can't tell if it's a man or a woman...
yes, a woman... then you are going to go on a long journey across the
sea, marry six dark men and have eleven children, grow a beard and die."

"Beast. And all this time I've been thinking it was serious. Hullo,
Tony. Jolly church?"

"Most enjoyable; how about some sherry?"

When they were alone together, just before luncheon, he said, "Darling,
you're being heroic with Beaver."

"Oh, I quite enjoy coping--in fact I'm bitching him rather."

"So I saw. Well, I'll look after him this afternoon and he's going this
evening."

"Is he? I'll be quite sorry. You know that's a difference between us,
that when someone's awful you just run away and hide, while I actually
enjoy it--making up to them and showing off to myself how well I can do
it. Besides, Beaver isn't so bad. He's quite like us in some ways."

"He's not like me," said Tony.

After luncheon Tony said, "Well, if it would really amuse you, we might
go over the house. I know it isn't fashionable to like this sort of
architecture now--my Aunt Frances says it is an authentic Pecksniff--but
I think it's good of its kind."

It took them two hours. Beaver was well practised in the art of being
shown over houses; he had been brought up to it in fact, ever since he
had begun to accompany his mother, whose hobby it had always been, and
later, with changing circumstances, profession. He made apt and
appreciative comments and greatly enhanced the pleasure Tony always took
in exposing his treasures.

They saw it all: the shuttered drawing-room, like a school speech hall,
the cloistral passages, the dark inner courtyard, the chapel where,
until Tony's succession, family prayers had been daily read to the
assembled household, the plate-room and estate office, the bedrooms and
attics, the water-tank concealed among the battlements. They climbed the
spiral staircase into the works of the clock and waited to see it strike
half-past three. Thence they descended with ringing ears to the
collections--enamel, ivories, seals, snuff-boxes, china, ormulu,
cloisonn?; they paused before each picture in the oak gallery and
discussed its associations; they took out the more remarkable folios in
the library and examined prints of the original buildings, manuscript
account-books of the old Abbey, travel journals of Tony's ancestors. At
intervals Beaver would say, "The So-and-so's have got one rather like
that at Such-and-such a place", and Tony would say, "Yes, I've seen it
but I think mine is the earlier." Eventually they came back to the
smoking-room and Tony left Beaver to Brenda.

She was stitching away at the petit-point, hunched in an armchair.
"Well," she asked, without looking up from her needlework, "what did you
think of it?"

"Magnificent."

"You don't have to say that to me, you know."

"Well, a lot of the things are very fine."

"Yes, the _things_ are all right, I suppose."

"But don't you like the house?"

"Me? I _detest_ it... at least I don't mean that really, but I do wish
sometimes that it wasn't _all_, every bit of it, so appallingly ugly.
Only I'd die rather than say that to Tony. We could never live anywhere
else, of course. He's crazy about the place... It's funny. None of us
minded very much when my brother Reggie sold _our_ house--and that was
built by Vanbrugh, you know... I suppose we're lucky to be able to
afford to keep it up at all. Do you know how much it costs just to live
here? We should be quite rich if it wasn't for that. As it is we support
fifteen servants indoors, besides gardeners and carpenters and a
night-watchman and all the people at the farm and odd little men
constantly popping in to wind the clocks and cook the accounts and clean
the moat, while Tony and I have to fuss about whether it's cheaper to
take a car up to London for the night or buy an excursion ticket... I
shouldn't feel so badly about it if it were a really lovely house--like
my home for instance... but of course Tony's been brought up here and
sees it all differently..."

Tony joined them for tea. "I don't want to seem inhospitable, but if
you're going to catch that train, you ought really to be getting ready."

"That's all right. I've persuaded him to stay on till to-morrow."

"If you're sure you don't..."

"Splendid. I _am_ glad. It's beastly going up at this time, particularly
by that train."

When John came in he said, "I thought Mr Beaver was going."

"Not till to-morrow."

"Oh."

After dinner Tony sat and read the papers. Brenda and Beaver were on the
sofa playing games together. They did a cross-word. Beaver said, "I've
thought of something", and Brenda asked him questions to find what it
was. He was thinking of the rum Peppermint drank. John had told him the
story at tea. Brenda guessed it quite soon. Then they played "Analogies"
about their friends and finally about each other.

They said good-bye that night because Beaver was catching the 9.10.

"Do let me know when you come to London."

"I may be up this week."

Next morning Beaver tipped both butler and footman ten shillings each.
Tony, still feeling rather guilty in spite of Brenda's heroic coping,
came down to breakfast to see his guest off. Afterwards he went back to
Guinevere.

"Well, that's the last of _him_. You were superb, darling. I'm sure he's
gone back thinking that you're mad about him."

"Oh, he wasn't too awful."

"No. I must say he took a very intelligent interest when we went round
the house."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Mrs Beaver was eating her yoghourt when Beaver reached home. "Who was
there?"

"No one."

"No one? My poor boy."

"They weren't expecting me. It was awful at first but got better. They
were just as you said. She's very charming. He scarcely spoke."

"I wish I saw her sometimes."

"She talked of taking a flat in London."

"_Did_ she?" The conversion of stables and garages was an important part
of Mrs Beaver's business. "What does she want?"

"Something quite simple. Two rooms and a bath. But it's all quite vague.
She hasn't said anything to Tony yet."

"I am sure I shall be able to find her something."


[II]

If Brenda had to go to London for a day's shopping, hair-cutting, or
bone-setting (a recreation she particularly enjoyed), she went on
Wednesday, because the tickets on that day were half the usual price.
She left at eight in the morning and got home soon after ten at night.
She travelled third-class and the carriages were often full, because
other wives on the line took advantage of the cheap fare. She usually
spent the day with her younger sister, Marjorie, who was married to the
prospective Conservative candidate for a South London constituency of
strong Labour sympathies. She was more solid than Brenda. The newspapers
used always to refer to them as "the lovely Rex sisters". Marjorie and
Allan were hard up and popular; they could not afford a baby; they lived
in a little house in the neighbourhood of Portman Square, very
convenient for Paddington Station. They had a Pekingese dog named Djinn.

Brenda had come on impulse, leaving the butler to ring up and tell
Marjorie of her arrival. She emerged from the train, after two hours and
a quarter in a carriage crowded five a side, looking as fresh and
fragile as if she had that moment left a circle of masseuses,
chiropodists, manicurists and coiffeuses in an hotel suite. It was an
aptitude she had, never to look half-finished; when she was really
exhausted, as she often was on her return to Hetton after these days in
London, she went completely to pieces quite suddenly and became a waif;
then she would sit over the fire with a cup of bread and milk, hardly
alive, until Tony took her up to bed.

Marjorie had her hat on and was sitting at her writing-table puzzling
over her cheque-book and a sheaf of bills.

"Darling, what _does_ the country do to you? You look like a thousand
pounds. Where _did_ you get that suit?"

"I don't know. Some shop."

"What's the news at Hetton?"

"All the same. Tony madly feudal. John Andrew cursing like a stable
boy."

"And you?"

"Me? Oh, I'm all right."

"Who's been to stay?"

"No one. We had a friend of Tony's called Mr Beaver last week-end."

"John Beaver?... How very odd. I shouldn't have thought he was at all
Tony's ticket."

"He wasn't... What's he like?"

"I hardly know him. I see him at Margot's sometimes. He's a great one
for going everywhere."

"I thought he was rather pathetic."

"Oh, he's _pathetic_ all right. D'you fancy him?"

"Heavens, no."

They took Djinn for a walk in the park. He was a very unrepaying dog who
never looked about him and had to be dragged along by his harness; they
took him to Watts's _Physical Energy_; when loosed he stood perfectly
still, gazing moodily at the asphalt until they turned towards home;
only once did he show any sign of emotion, when he snapped at a small
child who attempted to stroke him; later he got lost and was found a few
yards away, sitting under a chair and staring at a shred of waste paper.
He was quite colourless, with pink nose and lips and pink circles of
bald flesh round his eyes. "I don't believe he has a spark of human
feeling," said Marjorie.

They talked about Mr Cruttwell, their bone-setter, and Marjorie's new
treatment. "He's never done that to me," said Brenda enviously;
presently, "What do you suppose is Mr Beaver's sex-life?"

"I shouldn't know. Pretty dim, I imagine... You _do_ fancy him?"

"Oh well," said Brenda, "I don't see such a lot of young men..."

They left the dog at home and did some shopping--towels for the nursery,
pickled peaches, a clock for one of the lodgekeepers who was celebrating
his sixtieth year of service at Hetton, a pot of Morecambe Bay shrimps
as a surprise for Tony; they made an appointment with Mr Cruttwell for
that afternoon. They talked about Polly Cockpurse's party. "Do come up
for it. It's certain to be amusing."

"I might... if I can find someone to take me. Tony doesn't like her...
I can't go to parties alone at my age."

They went out to luncheon, to a new restaurant in Albemarle Street which
a friend of theirs named Daisy had recently opened. "You're in luck,"
said Marjorie, as soon as they got inside the door, "there's your Mr
Beaver's mother."

She was entertaining a party of eight at a large round table in the
centre of the room; she was being paid to do so by Daisy, whose
restaurant was not doing all she expected of it--that is to say the
luncheon was free and Mrs Beaver was getting the order, should the
restaurant still be open, for its spring redecorations. It was,
transparently, a made-up party, the guests being chosen for no mutual
bond--least of all affection for Mrs Beaver or for each other--except
that their names were in current use--an accessible but not wholly
renegade duke, an unmarried girl of experience, a dancer and a novelist
and a scene designer, a shamefaced junior minister who had not realized
what he was in for until too late, and Lady Cockpurse. "God, what a
party," said Marjorie, waving brightly to them all.

"You're both coming to my party, darlings?" Polly Cockpurse's strident
tones rang across the restaurant. "Only don't tell anyone about it. It's
just a very small, secret party. The house will only hold a few
people--just old friends."

"It would be wonderful to see what Polly's _real_ old friends were
like," said Marjorie. "She hasn't known anyone more than five years."

"I wish Tony could see her point."

(Although Polly's fortune was derived from men, her popularity was
chiefly among women, who admired her clothes and bought them from her
second-hand at bargain prices; her first steps to eminence had been in
circles so obscure that they had made her no enemies in the world to
which she aspired; some time ago she had married a good-natured earl,
whom nobody else happened to want at the time; since then she had scaled
all but the highest peaks of every social mountain.)

After luncheon Mrs Beaver came across to their table. "I _must_ come and
speak to you, though I'm in a great hurry. It's _so_ long since we met
and John has been telling me about a _delightful_ week-end he had with
you."

"It was very quiet."

"That's just what he _loves_. Poor boy, he gets rushed off his feet in
London. Tell me, Lady Brenda, is it true you are looking for a
flat?--because I think I've got just the place for you. It's being done
up now and will be ready well before Christmas." She looked at her
watch. "Oh dear, I must fly. You couldn't possibly come in for a
cocktail, this evening? Then you could hear all about it."

"I _could_..." said Brenda doubtfully.

"Then _do_. I'll expect you about six. I daresay you don't know where I
live?" She told her and left the table.

"What's all this about a flat?" Marjorie asked.

"Oh, just something I thought of..."

                 *        *        *        *        *

That afternoon, as she lay luxuriously on the osteopath's table, and her
vertebrae, under his strong fingers, snapped like patent fasteners,
Brenda wondered whether Beaver would be at home that evening. "Probably
not, if he's so keen on going about," she thought, "and, anyhow, what's
the sense?..."

But he was there, in spite of two other invitations.

She heard all about the maisonette. Mrs Beaver knew her job. What people
wanted, she said, was somewhere to dress and telephone. She was
subdividing a small house in Belgravia into six flats at three pounds a
week, of one room each and a bath; the bathrooms were going to be
slap-up, with limitless hot water and every transatlantic refinement;
the other room would have a large built-in wardrobe with electric light
inside, and space for a bed. It would fill a long-felt need, Mrs Beaver
said.

"I'll ask my husband and let you know."

"You _will_ let me know soon, won't you, because _everyone_ will be
wanting one."

"I'll let you know very soon."

When she had to go, Beaver came with her to the station. She usually ate
some chocolate and buns in her carriage; they bought them together at
the buffet. There was plenty of time before the train left and the
carriage was not yet full. Beaver came in and sat with her.

"I'm sure you want to go away."

"No, really."

"I've got lots to read."

"I _want_ to stay."

"It's very sweet of you." Presently she said, rather timidly, for she
was not used to asking for that sort of thing, "I suppose you wouldn't
like to take me to Polly's party, would you?"

Beaver hesitated. There would be several dinner parties that evening and
he was almost certain to be invited to one or other of them... if he
took Brenda out it would mean the Embassy or some smart restaurant...
three pounds at least... and he would be responsible for her and have
to see her home... and if, as she said, she really did not know many
people nowadays (why indeed should she have asked him if that were not
true?) it might mean tying himself up for the whole evening... "I wish
I could," he said, "but I've promised to dine out for it."

Brenda had observed his hesitation. "I was afraid you would have."

"But we'll meet there."

"Yes, if I go."

"I wish I could have taken you."

"It's quite all right... I just wondered."

The gaiety with which they had bought the buns was all gone now. They
were silent for a minute. Then Beaver said, "Well, I think perhaps I'll
leave you now."

"Yes, run along. Thank you for coming."

He went off down the platform. There were still eight minutes to go. The
carriage suddenly filled up and Brenda felt tired out. "Why _should_ he
want to take me, poor boy?" she thought. "Only he might have done it
better."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Barnardo case?"

Brenda nodded. "Down and out," she said, "sunk, right under." She sat
nursing her bread and milk, stirring it listlessly. Every bit of her
felt good for nothing.

"Good day?"

She nodded. "Saw Marjorie and her filthy dog. Bought some things.
Lunched at Daisy's new joint. Bone-setter. That's all."

"You know I wish you'd give up these day-trips to London. They're far
too much for you."

"Me? Oh, I'm all right. Wish I was dead, that's all... and please,
please, darling Tony, don't say anything about bed, because I can't
move."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Next day a telegram came from Beaver. _Have got out of dinner 16th. Are
you still free._

She replied: _Delighted. Second thoughts always best. Brenda._

Up till then they had avoided Christian names.

"You seem in wonderful spirits to-day," Tony remarked.

"I feel big. I think it's Mr Cruttwell. He puts all one's nerves right
and one's circulation and everything."


[III]

"Where's mummy gone?"

"London."

"Why?"

"Someone called Lady Cockpurse is giving a party."

"Is she nice?"

"Mummy thinks so. I don't."

"Why?"

"Because she looks like a monkey."

"I should love to see her. Does she live in a cage? Has she got a tail?
Ben saw a woman who looked like a fish, with scales all over instead of
skin. It was in a circus in Cairo. Smelt like a fish too, Ben says."

They were having tea together on the afternoon of Brenda's departure.
"Daddy, what does Lady Cockpurse eat?"

"Oh, nuts and things."

"Nuts and what things?"

"Different kinds of nuts."

For days to come the image of this hairy, mischievous Countess occupied
John Andrew's mind. She became one of the inhabitants of his world, like
Peppermint, the mule who died of rum. When kindly people spoke to him in
the village he would tell them about her and how she swung head down
from a tree throwing nutshells at passers-by.

"You mustn't say things like that about real people," said nanny.
"Whatever would Lady Cockpurse do if she heard about it?"

"She'd gibber and chatter and lash round with her tail, and then I
expect she'd catch some nice, big, juicy fleas and forget all about it."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda was staying at Marjorie's for the night. She was dressed first
and came into her sister's room. "Lovely, darling. New?"

"Fairly."

Marjorie was rung up by the woman at whose house she was dining. ("Look
here, are you absolutely sure you can't make Allan come to-night?"
"Absolutely. He's got a meeting in Camberwell. He may not even come to
Polly's." "Is there _any_ man you can bring?" "Can't think of anybody."
"Well, we shall have to be one short, that's all. I can't think what's
happened to-night. I rang up John Beaver but even _he_ won't come.")

"You know," said Marjorie, putting down the telephone, "you're causing a
great deal of trouble. You've taken London's only spare man."

"Oh dear, I didn't realize..."

Beaver arrived at quarter to nine in a state of high self-approval; he
had refused two invitations to dinner while dressing that evening; he
had cashed a cheque for ten pounds at his club; he had booked a divan
table at Espinosa's. It was almost the first time in his life that he
had taken anyone out to dinner, but he knew perfectly well how it was
done.

"I must see your Mr Beaver properly," said Marjorie. "Let's make him
take off his coat and drink something."

The two sisters were a little shy as they came downstairs, but Beaver
was perfectly at his ease. He looked very elegant and rather more than
his age.

"Oh, he's not so bad, your Mr Beaver," Marjorie's look seemed to say,
"not by any means," and he, seeing the two women together, who were both
beautiful, though in a manner so different that, although it was
apparent that they were sisters, they might have belonged each to a
separate race, began to understand what had perplexed him all the week;
why, contrary to all habit and principle, he had telegraphed to Brenda
asking her to dine.

"Mrs Jimmy Deane's very upset that she couldn't get you for to-night. I
didn't give away what you were doing."

"Give her my love," said Beaver. "Anyway we'll all meet at Polly's."

"I must go, we're dining at nine."

"Stay a bit," said Brenda. "She's sure to be late."

Now that it was inevitable, she did not want to be left alone with
Beaver.

"No, I must go. Enjoy yourselves, bless you both." She felt as though
she were the elder sister, seeing Brenda timid and expectant at the
beginning of an adventure.

They were awkward when Marjorie left, for in the week that they had been
apart, each had, in thought, grown more intimate with the other than any
actual occurrence warranted. Had Beaver been more experienced, he might
have crossed to where Brenda was sitting on the arm of a chair, and made
love to her at once; and probably he would have got away with it.
Instead he remarked in an easy manner, "I suppose we ought to be going
too."

"Yes, where?"

"I thought Espinosa's."

"Yes, lovely. Only listen. I want you to understand right away that it's
_my_ dinner."

"Of course not... nothing of the sort."

"Yes it is. I'm a year older than you and an old married woman and quite
rich, so, please, I'm going to pay."

Beaver continued protesting to the taxi door.

But there was still a constraint between them and Beaver began to
wonder, "Does she expect me to pounce?" So, as they waited in a traffic
block by the Marble Arch, he leaned forward to kiss her; when he was
quite near, she drew back. He said, "_Please_, Brenda," but she turned
away and looked out of the window, shaking her head several times
quickly. Then, her eyes still fixed on the window, she put out her hand
to his and they sat in silence till they reached the restaurant.

Beaver was thoroughly puzzled.

Once they were in public again, his confidence returned. Espinosa led
them to their table; it was the one by itself on the right of the door,
the only table in the restaurant at which one's conversation was not
overheard. Brenda handed him the card. "You choose. Very little for me,
but it must only have starch, no protein."

The bill at Espinosa's was, as a rule, roughly the same whatever one
ate, but Brenda would not know this, so, since it was now understood
that she was paying, Beaver felt constrained from ordering anything that
looked obviously expensive. However, she insisted on champagne, and
later a ballon of liqueur brandy for him. "You can't think how exciting
it is for me to take a young man out. I've never done it before."

They stayed at Espinosa's until it was time to go to the party, dancing
once or twice, but most of the time sitting at the table, talking. Their
interest in each other had so far outdistanced their knowledge that
there was a great deal to say.

Presently Beaver said, "I'm sorry I was an ass in the taxi just now."

"Eh?"

He changed it and said, "Did you mind when I tried to kiss you just
now?"

"Me? No, not particularly."

"Then why wouldn't you let me?"

"Oh dear, you've got a lot to learn."

"How d'you mean?"

"You mustn't ever ask questions like that. Will you try and remember?"

Then he was sulky. "You talk to me as if I was an undergraduate having
his first walk out."

"Oh, is this a walk out?"

"Not as far as I am concerned."

There was a pause in which Brenda said, "I am not sure it hasn't been a
mistake, taking you out to dinner. Let's ask for the bill and go to
Polly's."

But they took ten minutes to bring the bill, and in that time Beaver and
Brenda had to say something, so he said he was sorry.

"You've got to _learn_ to be nicer," she said soberly. "I don't believe
you'd find it impossible." When the bill eventually came, she said, "How
much do I tip him?" and Beaver showed her. "Are you sure that's enough?
I should have given twice as much."

"It's exactly right," said Beaver, feeling older again, just as Brenda
had meant him to feel.

When they sat in the taxi Beaver knew at once that Brenda wished him to
make love to her. But he decided it was time she took the lead. So he
sat at a distance from her and commented on an old house that was being
demolished to make way for a block of flats.

"Shut up," said Brenda. "Come here."

When he had kissed her, she rubbed against his cheek in the way she had.

                 *        *        *        *        *

Polly's party was exactly what she wished it to be, an accurate replica
of all the best parties she had been to in the last year; the same band,
the same supper and, above all, the same guests. Hers was not the
ambition to create a sensation, to have the party talked about in months
to come for any unusual feature, to hunt out shy celebrities or
introduce exotic strangers. She wanted a perfectly straight, smart party
and she had got it. Practically everyone she asked had come. If there
were other, more remote worlds upon which she did not impinge, Polly did
not know about them. These were the people she was after, and here they
were. And looking round on her guests, with Lord Cockpurse, who was for
the evening loyally putting in one of his rare appearances, at her side,
she was able to congratulate herself that there were very few people
present whom she did not want. In other years people had taken her
hospitality more casually and brought on with them anyone with whom they
happened to have been dining. This year, without any conscious effort on
her part, there had been more formality. Those who wanted to bring
friends had rung up in the morning and asked whether they might do so,
and on the whole they had been cautious of even so much presumption.
People who, only eighteen months before, would have pretended to be
ignorant of her existence were now crowding up her stairs. She had got
herself in line with the other married women of her world.

As they started to go up, Brenda said, "You're not to leave me, please.
I'm not going to know anybody," and Beaver again saw himself as the
dominant male.

They went straight through to the band and began dancing, not talking
much except to greet other couples whom they knew. They danced for half
an hour and then she said "All right, I'll give you a rest. Only don't
let me get left."

She danced with Jock Grant-Menzies and two or three old friends and did
not see Beaver again until she came on him alone in the bar. He had been
there a long time, talking sometimes to the couples who came in and out,
but always ending up alone. He was not enjoying the evening and he told
himself rather resentfully that it was because of Brenda; if he had come
there in a large party it would have been different.

Brenda saw he was out of temper and said, "Time for supper."

It was early, and the tables were mostly empty except for earnest
couples sitting alone. There was a large round table between the
windows, with no one at it; they sat there.

"I don't propose to move for a long time, d'you mind?" She wanted to
make him feel important again, so she asked him about the other people
in the room.

Presently their table filled up. These were Brenda's old friends, among
whom she used to live when she came out and in the first two years of
her marriage, before Tony's father died; men in the early thirties,
married women of her own age, none of whom knew Beaver or liked him. It
was by far the gayest table in the room. Brenda thought "How my poor
young man must be hating this"; it did not occur to her that, from
Beaver's point of view, these old friends of hers were quite the most
desirable people at the party, and that he was delighted to be seen at
their table. "Are you dying of it?" she whispered.

"No, indeed, never happier."

"Well, I am. Let's go and dance."

But the band was taking a rest and there was no one in the ballroom
except the earnest couples who had migrated there away from the crowd
and were sitting huddled in solitude round the walls, lost in
conversation. "Oh dear," said Brenda, "now we're done. We can't go back
to the table... it almost looks as though we should have to go home."

"It's not two."

"That's late for me. Look here, don't you come. Stay and enjoy
yourself."

"Of course I'll come," said Beaver.

It was a cold, clear night. Brenda shivered and he put his arm round her
in the taxi. They did not say much.

"There already?"

They sat for a few seconds without moving. Then Brenda slipped free and
Beaver got out.

"I am afraid I can't ask you in for a drink. You see it isn't my house
and I shouldn't know where to find anything."

"No, of course not."

"Well, good night, my dear. Thank you a thousand times for looking after
me. I'm afraid I rather bitched your evening."

"No, of course not," said Beaver.

"Will you ring me in the morning... promise?" She touched her hand to
her lips and then turned to the keyhole.

Beaver hesitated a minute whether he should go back to the party, but
decided not to. He was near home, and everyone at Polly's would have
settled down by now; so he gave his address in Sussex Gardens, and went
up to bed.

Just as he was undressed he heard the telephone ringing downstairs. It
was his telephone. He went down, two flights in the cold. It was
Brenda's voice.

"Darling, I was just going to ring off. I thought you must have gone
back to Polly's. Is the telephone not by your bed?"

"No, it's on the ground floor."

"Oh dear, then it wasn't a very good idea to ring up, was it?"

"Oh, I don't know. What is it?"

"Just to say "good night"."

"Oh, I see, well--good night."

"And you'll ring me in the morning?"

"Yes."

"Early, before you've made any plans."

"Yes."

"Then good night, bless you."

Beaver went up the two flights of stairs again, and got into bed.

                 *        *        *        *        *

"...going away in the middle of the party."

"I can't tell you how innocent it was. He didn't even come in."

"No one is going to know that."

"And he was furious when I rang him up."

"What does he think of you?"

"Simply can't make me out at all... terribly puzzled, and rather bored
in bits."

"Are you going to go on with it?"

"I shouldn't know." The telephone rang. "Perhaps that's him."

But it was not.

Brenda had come into Marjorie's room and they were having breakfast in
bed. Marjorie was more than ever like an elder sister that morning.
"But, really, Brenda, he's such a _dreary_ young man."

"I know it all. He's second rate and a snob and, I should think, as cold
as a fish, but I happen to have a fancy for him, that's all... besides
I'm not sure he's _altogether_ awful... he's got that odious mother
whom he adores... and he's always been very poor. I don't think he's
had a fair deal. I heard all about it last night. He got engaged once
but they couldn't get married because of money and since then he's never
had a proper affair with anyone decent... he's got to be taught a whole
lot of things. That's part of his attraction."

"Oh dear, I see you're very serious."

The telephone rang.

"Perhaps _that's_ him."

But a familiar voice rang out from the instrument so that Brenda could
hear it, "Good morning, darling, what's the dirt to-day?"

"Oh, Polly, what a good party last night."

"Not so bad for the old girl, was it? I say, what about your sister and
Mr Beaver?"

"What about them?"

"How long has _that_ been on?"

"There's nothing doing there, Polly."

"Don't you tell me. They were well away last night. How's the boy
managed it? That's what I want to know. He must have something we didn't
know about..."

"So Polly's on to your story. She'll be telling everyone in London at
this moment."

"How I wish there was anything to tell! The cub hasn't even rung me
up... Well, I'll leave him in peace. If he doesn't do anything about me,
I'll go down to Hetton this afternoon. Perhaps that's him." But it was
only Allan from the Conservative Central Office, to say how sorry he had
been not to get to the party the night before. "I hear Brenda disgraced
herself," he said.

"Goodness," said Brenda. "People do think that young men are easily come
by."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"I scarcely saw you at Polly's last night," said Mrs Beaver. "What
became of you?"

"We went early. Brenda Last was tired."

"She was looking lovely. I am so glad you've made friends with her. When
are you going to see her again?"

"I said I'd ring up."

"Well, why don't you?"

"Oh, mumsy, what's the use? I can't afford to start taking about women
like Brenda Last. If I ring up she'll say, what are you doing, and I
shall have to ask her to something, and it will be the same thing every
day. I simply haven't the money."

"I know, my son. It's very difficult for you... and you're wonderful
about money. I ought to be grateful that I haven't a son always coming
to me with debts. Still, it doesn't do to deny yourself _everything_,
you know. You're getting to be an old bachelor already at twenty-five. I
could see Brenda liked you, that evening she came here."

"Oh, she likes me all right."

"I hope she makes up her mind about that flat. They're going like hot
cakes. I shall have to look about for another suitable house to split
up. You'd be surprised who've been taking them--quite a number of people
with houses in London already... Well, I must be getting back to work.
I'm away for two nights by the way. See that Chambers looks after you
properly. There are some Australians Sylvia Newport discovered who want
to take a house in the country, so I'm driving them round to one or two
that might do for them. Where are you lunching?"

"Margot's."

By one o'clock, when they came back from taking Djinn to the park,
Beaver had not rung up. "So that's that," said Brenda, "I daresay I'm
glad really." She sent a telegram to Tony to expect her by the afternoon
train and, in a small voice, ordered her things to be packed. "I don't
seem to have anywhere to lunch," she said.

"Why don't you come to Margot's? I know she'd love it."

"Well, ring up and ask her."

So she met Beaver again.

He was sitting some way from her and they did not speak to each other
until everyone was going. "I kept trying to get through to you this
morning," he said, "but the line was always engaged."

"Oh, come on," said Brenda, "I'll sock you a movie."

Later she wired to Tony: _Staying with Marjorie another day or two all
love to you both_.


[IV]

"Is mummy coming back to-day?"

"I hope so."

"That monkey-woman's party has lasted a long time. Can I come in to the
station and meet her?"

"Yes, we'll both go."

"She hasn't seen Thunderclap for four days. She hasn't seen me jump the
new post and rail, has she, daddy?"

She was coming by the 3.18. Tony and John Andrew were there early. They
wandered about the station looking at things, and bought some chocolate
from a slot machine. The stationmaster came out to talk to them. "Her
ladyship coming back to-day?" He was an old friend of Tony's.

"I've been expecting her every day. You know what it is when ladies get
to London."

"Sam Brace's wife went to London and he couldn't get her back. Had to go
up and fetch her himself. And then she give him a hiding."

Presently the train came in and Brenda emerged exquisitely from her
third-class carriage. "You've _both_ come. What angels you are. I don't
at all deserve it."

"Oh, mummy, have you brought the monkey-lady?"

"What _does_ the child mean?"

"He's got it into his head that your chum Polly has a tail."

"Come to think of it, I shouldn't be surprised if she had."

Two little cases held all her luggage. The chauffeur strapped them on
behind the car, and they drove to Hetton.

"What's all the news?"

"Ben's put the rail up ever so high and Thunderclap and I jumped it six
times yesterday and six times again to-day and two more of the fish in
the little pond are dead, floating upside down all swollen and nanny
burnt her finger on the kettle yesterday and daddy and I saw a fox just
as near as anything and he sat quite still and then went away into the
wood and I began drawing a picture of a battle only I couldn't finish it
because the paints weren't right and the grey carthorse the one that had
worms is quite well again."

"Nothing much has happened," said Tony. "We've missed you. What did you
find to do in London all this time?"

"Me? Oh, I've been behaving rather badly to tell you the truth."

"Buying things?"

"Worse. I've been carrying on madly with young men and I've spent heaps
of money and I've enjoyed it very much indeed. But there's one awful
thing."

"What's that?"

"No, I think it had better keep. It's something you won't like at all."

"You've bought a Pekingese."

"Worse, far worse. Only I haven't done it yet. But I _want_ to
dreadfully."

"Go on."

"Tony, I've found a flat."

"Well, you'd better lose it again, quick."

"All right. I'll attack you about it again later. Meanwhile, try not to
brood about it."

"I shan't give it another thought."

"What's a flat, daddy?"

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda wore pyjamas at dinner, and afterwards sat close to Tony on the
sofa and ate some sugar out of his coffee cup.

"I suppose all this means that you're going to start again about your
flat?"

"Mmmm."

"You haven't signed any papers yet, have you?"

"Oh no." Brenda shook her head emphatically.

"Then no great harm's done." Tony began to fill his pipe.

Brenda knelt on the sofa, sitting back on her heels. "Listen, you
haven't been brooding?"

"No."

"Because, you see, when you say 'flat' you're thinking of something
quite different to me. _You_ mean by a flat, a lift and a man in
uniform, and a big front door with knobs, and an entrance hall and doors
opening in all directions, with kitchens and sculleries and dining-rooms
and drawing-rooms and servants' bedrooms... don't you, Tony?"

"More or less."

"_Exactly._ Now _I_ mean just a bedroom and a bath and a telephone. You
see the difference? Now a woman I know--"

"Who?"

"Just a woman--has fixed up a whole house like that off Belgrave Square
and they are three pounds a week, no rates and taxes, constant hot water
and central heating, woman comes in to make the bed when required, what
d'you think of that?"

"I see."

"Now this is how I look at it. What's three pounds a week? Less than
nine bob a night. Where could one stay for less than nine bob a night
with all those advantages? You're always going to the club, and that
costs more, and I can't stay often with Marjorie because it's hell for
her having me, and anyway she's got that dog, and you're always saying
when I come back in the evenings after shopping, "Why didn't you stay
the night," you say, "instead of killing yourself?" Time and again you
say it. I'm sure we spend much more than three pounds a week through not
having a flat. Tell you what, I'll give up Mr Cruttwell. How's that?"

"D'you really want this thing?"

"Mmm."

"Well, I'll have to see. We _might_ manage it, but it'll mean putting
off the improvements down here."

"I don't really deserve it," she said, clinching the matter. "I've been
carrying on _anyhow_ this week."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda's stay at Hetton lasted only for three nights. Then she returned
to London, saying that she had to see about the flat. It did not,
however, require very great attention. There was only the colour of the
paint to choose and some few articles of furniture. Mrs Beaver had them
ready for her inspection, a bed, a carpet, a dressing table and
chair--there was not room for more. Mrs Beaver tried to sell her a set
of needlework pictures for the walls, but these she refused, also an
electric bed-warmer, a miniature weighing machine for the bathroom, a
Frigidaire, an antique grandfather clock, a backgammon set of
looking-glass and synthetic ivory, a set of prettily bound French
eighteenth-century poets, a massage apparatus, and a wireless set fitted
in a case of Regency lacquer, all of which had been grouped in the shop
for her as a "suggestion". Mrs Beaver bore Brenda no ill will for the
modesty of her requirements; she was doing very well on the floor above
with a Canadian lady who was having her walls covered with chromium
plating at immense expense.

Meanwhile Brenda stayed with Marjorie, on terms which gradually became
acrimonious. "I'm sorry to be pompous," she said one morning, "but I
just don't want your Mr Beaver hanging about the house all day and
calling me Marjorie."

"Oh well, the flat won't be long now."

"And I shall go on saying that I think you're making a ridiculous
mistake."

"It's just that you don't like Mr Beaver."

"It isn't only that. I think it's hard cheese on Tony."

"Oh, Tony's all right."

"And if there's a row--"

"There won't be a row."

"You never know. If there is, I don't want Allan to think I've been
helping to arrange things."

"I wasn't so disagreeable to you about Robin Beaseley."

"There was never much in that," said Marjorie.

But with the exception of her sister's, opinion was greatly in favour of
Brenda's adventure. The morning telephone buzzed with news of her; even
people with whom she had the barest acquaintance were delighted to
relate that they had seen her and Beaver the evening before at a
restaurant or cinema. It had been an autumn of very sparse and meagre
romance; only the most obvious people had parted or come together, and
Brenda was filling a want long felt by those whose simple, vicarious
pleasure it was to discuss the subject in bed over the telephone. For
them her circumstances shed peculiar glamour; for five years she had
been a legendary, almost ghostly name, the imprisoned princess of fairy
story, and now that she had emerged there was more enchantment in the
occurrence than in the mere change of habit of any other circumspect
wife. Her very choice of partner gave the affair an appropriate touch of
fantasy; Beaver, the joke figure they had all known and despised,
suddenly caught up to her among the luminous clouds of deity. If, after
seven years looking neither to right or left, she had at last broken
away with Jock Grant-Menzies or Robin Beaseley or any other young buck
with whom nearly everyone had had a crack one time or another, it would
have been thrilling no doubt, but straightforward, drawing-room comedy.
The choice of Beaver raised the whole escapade into a realm of poetry
for Polly and Daisy and Angela and all the gang of gossips.

Mrs Beaver made no bones about her delight. "Of course the subject has
not been mentioned between John and myself, but if what I hear is true,
I think it will do the boy a world of good. Of course he's always been
very much in demand and had a great number of friends, but _that isn't
the same thing_. I've felt for a long time a Lack of Something in him,
and I think that a charming and experienced woman like Brenda Last is
just the person to help him. He's got a _very_ affectionate nature, but
he's so sensitive that he hardly ever lets it appear... to tell you the
truth I felt something of the kind was in the air last week, so I made
an excuse to go away for a few days. If I had been there things might
never have come to anything. He's very shy and reserved even to me. I'll
have the chess-men done up and sent round to you this afternoon. Thank
you so much."

And Beaver, for the first time in his life, found himself a person of
interest and, almost, of consequence. Women studied him with a new
scrutiny, wondering what they had missed in him; men treated him as an
equal, even as a successful fellow competitor. "How on earth has _he_
got away with it?" they may have asked themselves, but now, when he came
into Bratt's, they made room for him at the bar and said, "Well, old
boy, how about one?"

                 *        *        *        *        *

Brenda rang up Tony every morning and evening. Sometimes John Andrew
spoke to her, too, as shrill as Polly Cockpurse; quite unable to hear
her replies. She went to Hetton for the week-end, and then back to
London, this time to the flat where the paint was already dry, though
the hot water was not yet in perfect working order; everything smelt
very new--walls, sheets, curtains--and the new radiators gave off a less
agreeable reek of hot iron.

That evening as usual she telephoned to Hetton. "I'm talking from the
flat."

"Oh, ah."

"_Darling_, do try to sound interested. It's very exciting for me."

"What's it like?"

"Well, there are a good many smells at present and the bath makes odd
sounds and when you turn on the hot tap there's just a rush of air and
that's all, and the cold tap keeps dripping and the water is rather
brown and the cupboard doors are jammed and the curtains won't pull
right across so that the street lamp shines in all night... but it's
_lovely_."

"You don't say so."

"Tony, you must be nice about it. It's all so exciting--front door and a
latch-key and all... And someone sent me a lot of flowers to-day--so
many that there's hardly room for them and I've had to put them in the
basin on account of having no pots. It wasn't you, was it?"

"Yes... as a matter of fact."

"Darling, I did so hope it was... how like you."

"Three minutes, please."

"Must stop now."

"When are you coming back?"

"Almost at once. Good night, my sweet."

"What a lot of talk," said Beaver.

All the time that she was speaking, she had been kept busy with one hand
warding him off the telephone, which he threatened playfully to
disconnect.

"Wasn't it sweet of Tony to send those flowers?"

"I'm not awfully fond of Tony."

"Don't let that worry you, my beauty, he doesn't like you _at all_."

"_Doesn't_ he? Why not?"

"No one does except me. You must get that clear... it's very odd that
_I_ should."

                 *        *        *        *        *

Beaver and his mother were going to Ireland for Christmas, to stay with
cousins. Tony and Brenda had a family party at Hetton: Marjorie and
Allan, Brenda's mother, Tony's Aunt Frances and two families of
impoverished Lasts, humble and uncomplaining victims of primogeniture,
to whom Hetton meant as much as it did to Tony. There was a little
Christmas-tree in the nursery for John Andrew and a big one downstairs
in the central hall which was decorated by the impoverished Lasts and
lit up for half an hour after tea (two footmen standing by with wet
sponges on the end of poles, to extinguish the candles which turned
turtle and threatened to start a fire). There were presents for all the
servants, of value strictly graded according to their rank, and for all
the guests (cheques for the impoverished Lasts). Allan always brought a
large cro?te of foie gras, a delicacy of which he was particularly fond.
Everyone ate a great deal and became slightly torpid towards Boxing-day
evening; silver ladles of burning brandy went round the table, crackers
were pulled and opened; paper hats, indoor fireworks, mottoes. This
year, everything happened in its accustomed way; nothing seemed to
menace the peace and stability of the house. The choir came up and sang
carols in the pitch-pine gallery, and later devoured hot punch and sweet
biscuits. The vicar preached his usual Christmas sermon. It was one to
which his parishioners were greatly attached.

"How difficult it is for us," he began, blandly surveying his
congregation, who coughed into their mufflers and chafed their
chilblains under their woollen gloves, "to realize that this is indeed
Christmas. Instead of the glowing log fire and windows tight shuttered
against the drifting snow, we have only the harsh glare of an alien sun;
instead of the happy circle of loved faces, of home and family, we have
the uncomprehending stares of the subjugated, though no doubt grateful,
heathen. Instead of the placid ox and ass of Bethlehem," said the vicar,
slightly losing the thread of his comparisons, "we have for companions
the ravening tiger and the exotic camel, the furtive jackal and the
ponderous elephant..." And so on, through the pages of faded
manuscript. The words had temporarily touched the heart of many an
obdurate trooper, and hearing them again, as he had heard them year
after year since Mr Tendril had come to the parish, Tony and most of
Tony's guests felt that it was an integral part of their Christmas
festivities; one with which they would find it very hard to dispense.
"The ravening tiger and exotic camel" had long been bywords in the
family, of frequent recurrence in all their games.

These games were the hardest part for Brenda. They did not amuse her and
she still could not see Tony dressed up for charades without a feeling
of shyness. Moreover, she was tortured by the fear that any lack of
gusto on her part might be construed by the poor Lasts as superiority.
These scruples, had she known it, were quite superfluous, for it never
occurred to her husband's relatives to look on her with anything but
cousinly cordiality and a certain tolerance, for, as Lasts, they
considered they had far more right in Hetton than herself. Aunt Frances,
with acid mind, quickly discerned the trouble and attempted to reassure
her, saying, "Dear child, all these feelings of delicacy are valueless;
only the rich realize the gulf that separates them from the poor," but
the uneasiness persisted, and night after night she found herself being
sent out of the room, asking or answering questions, performing actions
in uncouth manners, paying forfeits, drawing pictures, writing verses,
dressing herself up and even being chased about the house, and secluded
in cupboards, at the will of her relatives. Christmas was on a Friday
that year, so the party was a long one, from Thursday until Monday.

She had forbidden Beaver to send her a present or to write to her; in
self-protection, for she knew that whatever he said would hurt her by
its poverty, but in spite of this she awaited the posts nervously,
hoping that he might have disobeyed her. She had sent him to Ireland a
ring of three interlocked hoops of gold and platinum. An hour after
ordering it she regretted her choice. On Tuesday a letter came from him
thanking her. _Darling Brenda_, he wrote. _Thank you so very much for
the charming Christmas present. You can imagine my delight when I saw
the pink leather case and my surprise at opening it. It really was_
sweet _of you to send me such a charming present. Thank you again very
much for it. I hope your party is being a success. It is rather dull
here. The others went hunting yesterday. I went to the meet. They did
not have a good day. Mother is here too and sends her love. We shall be
leaving to-morrow or the day after. Mother has got rather a cold._

It ended there at the bottom of a page. Beaver had been writing it
before dinner and later had put it in the envelope without remembering
to finish it.

He wrote a large, school-girlish hand with wide spaces between the
lines.

Brenda felt a little sick when she read this letter but she showed it to
Marjorie, saying, "I can't complain, he's never pretended to like me
much. And anyway it was a damned silly present."

Tony had become fretful about his visit to Angela's. He always hated
staying away.

"Don't come, darling. I'll make it all right with them."

"No, I'll come. I haven't seen so much of you in the last three weeks."

They had the whole of Wednesday alone together. Brenda exerted herself
and Tony's fretfulness subsided. She was particularly tender to him at
this time and scarcely teased him at all.

On Thursday they went North to Yorkshire. Beaver was there. Tony
discovered him in the first half hour and brought the news to Brenda
upstairs.

"I'll tell you something very odd," he said. "Who do you think is here?"

"Who?"

"Our old friend Beaver."

"Why's that odd particularly?"

"Oh, I don't know. I'd forgotten all about him, hadn't you? D'you think
he sent a telegram as he did to us?"

"I daresay."

Tony supposed Beaver must be fairly lonely and took pains to be
agreeable to him. He said, "All kinds of changes since we saw you last.
Brenda's taken a flat in London."

"Yes, I know."

"How?"

"Well, my mother let it to her, you know."

Tony was greatly surprised and taxed Brenda with this. "You never told
me who was behind your flat. I might not have been so amiable if I'd
known."

"No, darling, that's why."

Half the house party wondered why Beaver was there; the other half knew.
As a result of this he and Brenda saw each other very little, less than
if they had been casual acquaintances, so that Angela remarked to her
husband, "I daresay it was a mistake to ask him. It's so hard to know."

Brenda never started the subject of the half-finished letter, but she
noticed that Beaver was wearing his ring, and had already acquired a
trick of twisting it as he talked.

On New Year's Eve there was a party at a neighbouring house. Tony went
home early and Beaver and Brenda returned together in the back of a car.
Next morning, while they were having breakfast, she said to Tony, "I've
made a New Year resolution."

"Anything to do with spending more time at home?"

"Oh no, _quite_ the reverse. Listen, Tony, it's serious. I think I'll
take a course of something."

"Not bone-setters again? I thought that was over."

"No, something like economics. You see, I've been thinking. I don't
really _do_ anything at all at present. The house runs itself. It seems
to me time I _took_ to something. Now you're always talking about going
into Parliament. Well, if I had done a course of economics I could be
some use canvassing and writing speeches and things--you know, the way
Marjorie did when Allan was standing on the Clydeside. There are all
sorts of lectures in London, to do with the University, where girls go.
Don't you think it's rather a good idea?"

"It's one better than the bone-setters," Tony admitted.

That was how the New Year began.




CHAPTER III
HARD CHEESE ON TONY


[I]

It is not uncommon at Bratt's Club, between nine and ten in the
evening, to find men in white ties and tail coats sitting by themselves
and eating, in evident low spirits, large and extravagant dinners. They
are those who have been abandoned at the last minute by their women. For
twenty minutes or so they have sat in the foyer of some restaurant,
gazing expectantly towards the revolving doors and alternatively taking
out their watches and ordering cocktails, until at length a telephone
message has been brought them that their guests are unable to come. Then
they go to Bratt's, half hoping to find friends but, more often than
not, taking a melancholy satisfaction in finding the club deserted or
peopled by strangers. So they sit there, round the walls, morosely
regarding the mahogany tables before them, and eating and drinking
heavily.

It was in this mood and for this reason that, one evening towards the
middle of February, Jock Grant-Menzies arrived at the club.

"Anyone here?"

"Very quiet to-night, sir. Mr Last is in the dining-room."

Jock found him seated in a corner; he was in day clothes; the table and
the chair at his side were littered with papers and magazines; one was
propped up in front of him. He was half-way through dinner and
three-quarters of the way through a bottle of Burgundy. "Hullo," he
said. "Chucked? Come and join me."

It was some time since Jock had seen Tony; the meeting embarrassed him
slightly, for like all his friends, he was wondering how Tony felt and
how much he knew about Brenda and John Beaver. However, he sat down at
Tony's table.

"Been chucked?" asked Tony again.

"Yes, it's the last time I ask that bitch out."

"Better have a drink. I've been drinking a whole lot. Much the best
thing."

They took what was left of the Burgundy and ordered another bottle.

"Just come up for the night," said Tony. "Staying here."

"You've got a flat now, haven't you?"

"Well, Brenda has. There isn't really room for two... we tried it once
and it wasn't a success."

"What's she doing to-night?"

"Out somewhere. I didn't let her know I was coming... silly not to, but
you see I got fed up with being alone at Hetton and thought I'd like to
see Brenda, so I came up suddenly on the spur of the moment, just like
that. Damned silly thing to do. Might have known she'd be going out
somewhere... she's very high-principled about chucking... so there it
is. She's going to ring me up here later, if she can get away."

They drank a lot.

Tony did most of the talking. "Extraordinary idea of hers, taking up
economics," he said. "I never thought it would last, but she seems
really keen on it... I suppose it's a good plan. You know there wasn't
really much for her to do all the time at Hetton. Of course she'd rather
die than admit it, but I believe she got a bit bored there sometimes.
I've been thinking it over and that's the conclusion I came to. Brenda
must have been bored... Daresay she'll get bored with economics some
time... Anyway, she seems cheerful enough now. We've had parties every
week-end lately... I wish you'd come down sometimes, Jock. I don't seem
to get on with Brenda's new friends."

"People from the school of economics?"

"No, but ones I don't know. I believe I bore them. Thinking it over,
that's the conclusion I've come to. I bore them. They talk about me as
"the old boy". John heard them."

"Well, that's friendly enough."

"Yes, that's friendly."

They finished the Burgundy and drank some port. Presently Tony said, "I
say, come next week-end, will you?"

"I think I'd love to."

"Wish you would. I don't see many old friends... Sure to be lots of
people in the house, but you won't mind that, will you?... sociable
chap, Jock... doesn't mind people about. _I_ mind it like hell." They
drank some more port. Tony said, "Not enough bathrooms, you know... but
of course you know. You've been there before, often. Not like the new
friends who think me a bore. You don't think I'm a bore, do you?"

"No, old boy."

"Not even when I'm tight, like this?... There would have been
bathrooms. I had the plans out. Four new ones. A chap down there made
the plans... but then Brenda wanted the flat so I had to postpone them
as an economy... I say, that's funny. We had to economize because of
Brenda's economics."

"Yes, that's funny. Let's have some port."

Tony said, "You seem pretty low to-night."

"I am rather. Worried about the Pig Scheme. Constituents keep writing."

"_I_ felt low, _bloody_ low, but I'm all right again now. The best thing
is to get tight. That's what I did and I don't feel low any more...
discouraging to come to London and find you're not wanted. Funny thing,
_you_ feel low because your girl's chucked, and _I_ feel low because
mine won't chuck."

"Yes, that's funny."

"But you know I've felt low for weeks now... bloody low... how about
some brandy?"

"Yes, why not? After all, there are other things in life besides women
and pigs."

They had some brandy and after a time Jock began to cheer up.

Presently a page came to their table to say, "A message from Lady
Brenda, sir."

"Good, I'll go and speak to her."

"It's not her ladyship speaking. Someone was sending a message."

"I'll come and speak to her."

He went to the telephone in the lobby outside. "Darling," he said.

"Is that Mr Last? I've got a message here, from Lady Brenda."

"Right, put me through to her."

"She can't speak herself, but she asked me to give you this message,
that she's very sorry but she cannot join you to-night. She's very tired
and has gone home to bed."

"Tell her I want to speak to her."

"I can't, I'm afraid, she's gone to bed. She's very tired."

"She's very tired and she's gone to bed?"

"That's right."

"Well, I want to speak to her."

"Good night," said the voice.

"The old boy's plastered," said Beaver as he rang off.

"Oh dear. I feel rather awful about him. But what _can_ he expect,
coming up suddenly like this? He's got to be taught not to make surprise
visits."

"Is he often like that?"

"No, it's quite new."

The telephone bell rang. "D'you suppose that's him again? I'd better
answer it."

"I want to speak to Lady Brenda Last."

"Tony, darling, this _is_ me, Brenda."

"Some damn fool said I couldn't speak to you."

"I left a message from where I was dining. Are you having a lovely
evening?"

"Hellish. I'm with Jock. He's worried about the Pig Scheme. Shall we
come round and see you?"

"No, not now, darling, I'm terribly tired and just going to bed."

"We'll come and see you."

"Tony, are you a tiny bit tight?"

"Stinking. Jock and I'll come and see you."

"_Tony_, you're _not_ to. D'you hear? I can't have you making a brawl.
The flats are getting a bad name anyhow."

"Their name'll be mud when Jock and I come."

"Tony, listen, will you please not come, not to-night. Be a good boy and
stay at the club. Will you _please_ not?"

"Shan't be long." He rang off.

"Oh God," said Brenda. "This isn't the least like Tony. Ring up Bratt's
and get on to Jock. He'll have more sense."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"That was Brenda."

"So I gathered."

"She's at the flat. I said that we'd go round."

"Splendid. Haven't seen her for weeks. Very fond of Brenda."

"So am I. Grand girl."

"Grand girl."

"A lady on the telephone for you, Mr Grant-Menzies."

"Who?"

"She didn't give a name."

"All right. I'll come."

Brenda said to him, "Jock, what _have_ you been doing to my husband?"

"He's a bit tight, that's all."

"He's roaring. Look here, he threatens to come round. I simply can't
face him to-night in that mood, I'm tired out. You understand, don't
you?"

"Yes, I understand."

"So will you, _please_, keep him away? Are you tight too?"

"A little bit."

"Oh dear, can I trust you?"

"I'll try."

"Well, it doesn't sound too good. Good-bye... John, you've got to go.
Those hooligans may turn up at any moment. Have you got your taxi fare?
You'll find some change in my bag."

                 *        *        *        *        *

"Was that your girl?"

"Yes."

"Made it up?"

"Not exactly."

"Far better to make it up. Shall we have some more brandy or go round to
Brenda straight away?"

"Let's have some more brandy."

"Jock, you aren't still feeling low, are you? Doesn't do to feel low.
_I'm_ not feeling low. I _was_, but I'm not any more."

"No, I'm not feeling low."

"Then we'll have some brandy and then go to Brenda's."

"All right."

Half an hour later they got into Jock's car. "Tell you what, I shouldn't
drive if I were you."

"Not drive?"

"No, I shouldn't drive. They'd say you were drunk."

"Who would?"

"Anyone you ran over. They'd say you were drunk."

"Well, so I am."

"Then I shouldn't drive."

"Too far to walk."

"We'll take a taxi."

"Oh, hell, I can drive."

"Or let's not go to Brenda's at all."

"We'd better go to Brenda's," said Jock. "She's expecting us."

"Well, I can't walk all that way. Besides, I don't think she really
wanted us to come."

"She'll be pleased when she sees us."

"Yes, but it's a long way. Let's go some other place."

"I'd like to see Brenda," said Jock. "I'm very fond of Brenda."

"She's a grand girl."

"She's a grand girl."

"Well, let's take a taxi to Brenda's."

But half-way Jock said, "Don't let's go there. Let's go some other
place. Let's go to some low joint."

"All the same to me. Tell him to go to some lousy joint."

"Go to some lousy joint," said Jock, putting his head through the
window.

The cab wheeled round and made towards Regent Street.

"We can always ring Brenda from the lousy joint."

"Yes, I think we ought to do that. She's a grand girl."

"Grand girl."

The cab turned into Golden Square and then down Sink Street, a dingy
little place inhabited for the most part by Asiatics.

"D'you know, I believe he's taking us to the Old Hundredth."

"Can't still be open? Thought they closed it down years ago."

But the door was brightly illuminated and a seedy figure in peaked cap
and braided overcoat stepped out to open the taxi for them.

The Old Hundredth has never been shut. For a generation, while other
night clubs have sprung into being, with various names and managers, and
various pretensions to respectability, have enjoyed a precarious and
brief existence, and come to grief at the hands either of police or
creditors, the Old Hundredth has maintained a solid front against all
adversity. It has not been immune from persecution; far from it. Times
out of number, magistrates have struck it off, cancelled its licence,
condemned its premises; the staff and proprietor have been constantly in
and out of prison; there have been questions in the House and committees
of enquiry, but whatever Home Secretaries and Commissioners of Police
have risen into eminence and retired discredited, the doors of the Old
Hundredth have always been open from nine in the evening until four at
night, and inside there has been an unimpeded flow of dubious, alcoholic
preparations. A kindly young lady admitted Tony and Jock to the
ramshackle building.

"D'you mind signing on?" Tony and Jock inscribed fictitious names at the
foot of a form which stated, _I have been invited to a Bottle Party at
100 Sink Street given by Captain Weybridge_. "That's five bob each,
please."

It is not an expensive club to run, because none of the staff, except
the band, receive any wages; they make what they can by going through
the overcoat pockets and giving the wrong change to drunks. The young
ladies get in free but they have to see to it that their patrons spend
money.

"Last time I was here, Tony, was the bachelor party before your
wedding."

"Tight that night."

"Stinking."

"I'll tell you who else was tight that night--Reggie. Broke a fruit gum
machine."

"Reggie was stinking."

"I say, you don't still feel low about that girl?"

"I don't feel low."

"Come on, we'll go downstairs."

The dance-room was fairly full. An elderly man had joined the band and
was trying to conduct it. "I like this joint," said Jock. "What'll we
drink?"

"Brandy."

They had to buy the bottle. They filled in an order form to the
Montmorency Wine Company and paid two pounds. When it came there was a
label saying _Very Old Liqueur Fine Champagne. Imported by the
Montmorency Wine Co._ The waiter brought ginger ale and four glasses.
Two young ladies came and sat with them. They were called Milly and
Babs. Milly said, "Are you in town for long?" Babs said, "Have you got
such a thing as a cigarette?"

Tony danced with Babs. She said, "Are you fond of dancing?"

"No, are you?"

"So-so."

"Well, let's sit down."

The waiter said, "Will you buy a ticket in a raffle for a box of
chocolates?"

"No."

"Buy one for me," said Babs.

Jock began to describe the specifications of the Basic Pig.

...Milly said, "You're married, aren't you?"

"No," said Jock.

"Oh, I can always tell," said Milly. "Your friend is too."

"Yes, _he_ is."

"You'd be surprised how many gentlemen come here just to talk about
their wives."

"He hasn't."

Tony was leaning across the table and saying to Babs, "You see, the
trouble is my wife is studious. She's taking a course in economics."

Babs said, "I think it's nice for a girl to be interested in things."

The waiter said, "What will you be taking for supper?"

"Why, we've only just had dinner."

"How about a nice haddock?"

"I tell you what I must do is to telephone. Where is it?"

"D'you mean really the telephone or the gentlemen's?" Milly asked.

"No, the telephone."

"Upstairs in the office."

Tony rang up Brenda. It was some time before she answered, then, "Yes,
who is it?"

"I have a message here from Mr Anthony Last and Mr Jocelyn
Grant-Menzies."

"Oh, it's you, Tony. Well, what do you want?"

"You recognized my voice?"

"I did."

"Well, I only wanted to give a message but as I am speaking to you I can
give it myself, can't I?"

"Yes."

"Well, Jock and I are terribly sorry but we can't come round this
evening after all."

"Oh."

"You don't think it very rude, I hope, but we have a lot to attend to."

"That's all right, Tony."

"Did I wake you up by any chance?"

"That's all right, Tony."

"Well, good night."

Tony went down to the table. "I've been talking to Brenda. She sounded
rather annoyed. D'you think we _ought_ to go round there?"

"We promised we would," said Jock.

"You should never disappoint a lady," said Milly.

"Oh, it's too late now."

Babs said, "You two are officers, aren't you?"

"No, why?"

"I thought you were."

Milly said, "I like business gentlemen best, myself. They've more to
say."

"What d'you do?"

"I design postmen's hats," said Jock.

"Oh, go on."

"And my friend here trains sea-lions."

"Tell us another."

Babs said, "I've got a gentleman friend who works on a newspaper."

After a time Jock said, "I say, ought we to do something about Brenda?"

"I told her we weren't coming, didn't I?"

"Yes... but she might still be _hoping_."

"I tell you what, you go and ring her up and find out if she really
wants us."

"All right." He came back ten minutes later. "_I_ thought she sounded
rather annoyed," he reported. "But I said in the end we wouldn't come."

"She may be tired," said Tony. "Has to get up early to do economics. Now
I come to think of it someone _did_ say she was tired, earlier on in the
evening."

"I say, what's this frightful piece of fish?"

"The waiter said you ordered it."

"Perhaps I did."

"I'll give it to the club cat," said Babs. "She's a dear called
Blackberry."

They danced once or twice. Then Jock said, "D'you think we ought to ring
up Brenda again?"

"Perhaps we ought. She sounded annoyed with us."

"Let's go now and ring her up on the way out."

"Aren't you coming home with us?" said Babs.

"Not to-night, I'm afraid."

"Be a sport," said Milly.

"No, we can't really."

"All right. Well, how about a little present? We're professional dancing
partners, you know," said Babs.

"Oh yes, sorry, how much?"

"Oh, we leave that to the gentlemen."

Tony gave them a pound. "You might make it a bit more," said Babs.
"We've sat with you two hours."

Jock gave another pound. "Come and see us again one evening when you've
got more time," said Milly.

"I'm feeling rather ill," said Tony on the way upstairs. "Don't think I
shall bother to ring up Brenda."

"Send a message."

"That's a good idea... Look here," he said to the seedy commissionaire.
"Will you ring up this Sloane number and speak to her ladyship and say
Mr Grant-Menzies and Mr Last are very sorry but they cannot call this
evening? Got that?" He gave the man half a crown and they sauntered out
into Sink Street. "Brenda can't expect us to do more than that," he
said.

"I tell you what I'll do. I go almost past her door, so I'll ring the
bell a bit just in case she's awake and still waiting up for us."

"Yes, you do that. What a good friend you are, Jock."

"Oh, I'm fond of Brenda... a grand girl."

"Grand girl... I wish I didn't feel ill."

Tony was awake at eight next morning, miserably articulating in his mind
the fragmentary memories of the preceding night. The more he remembered,
the baser his conduct appeared to him. At nine he had his bath and some
tea. At ten he was wondering whether he should ring Brenda up when the
difficulty was solved by her ringing him.

"Well, Tony, how do you feel?"

"Awful. I _was_ tight."

"You were."

"I'm feeling pretty guilty too."

"I'm not surprised."

"I don't remember everything very clearly but I have the impression that
Jock and I were rather bores."

"You were."

"Are you in a rage?"

"Well, I was last night. What made you do it, Tony, grown up men like
you two?"

"We felt low."

"I bet you feel lower this morning... A box of white roses has just
arrived from Jock."

"I wish I'd thought of that."

"You're such infants, both of you."

"You aren't really in a rage?"

"Of course I'm not, darling. Now just you go straight back to the
country. You'll feel all right again to-morrow."

"Am I not going to see you?"

"Not to-day, I'm afraid. I've got lectures all the morning and I'm
lunching out. But I'll be coming down on Friday evening or anyway
Saturday morning."

"I see. You couldn't possibly chuck lunch or one of the lectures?"

"Not possibly, darling."

"I see. You are an angel to be so sweet about last night."

"Nothing could have been more fortunate," Brenda said. "If I know Tony,
he'll be tortured with guilt for weeks to come. It was maddening last
night but it was worth it. He's put himself so much in the wrong now
that he won't dare to _feel_ resentful, let alone say anything, whatever
I do. And he hasn't really enjoyed himself at all, the poor sweet, so
_that's_ a good thing too. He had to learn not to make surprise visits."

"You are one for making people learn things," said Beaver.

Tony emerged from the 3.18 feeling cold, tired, and heavy with guilt.
John Andrew had come in the car to meet him. "Hullo, daddy, had a good
time in London? You didn't mind me coming to the station, did you? I
_made_ nanny let me."

"Very pleased to see you, John."

"How was mummy?"

"She sounded very well. I didn't see her."

"But you _said_ you were going to see her."

"Yes, I thought I was, but I turned out to be wrong. I talked to her
several times on the telephone."

"But you can telephone her from here, can't you, daddy? Why did you go
all the way to London to telephone her?... _Why_, daddy?"

"It would take too long to explain."

"Well tell me some of it... _Why_, daddy?"

"Look here, I'm tired. If you don't stop asking questions I shan't let
you ever come and meet the train again."

John Andrew's face began to pucker. "I thought you'd _like_ me to come
and meet you."

"If you cry I shall put you in front with Dawson. It's absurd to cry at
your age."

"I'd _sooner_ go in front with Dawson," said John Andrew between his
tears.

Tony picked up the speaking-tube to tell the chauffeur to stop, but he
could not make him hear. So he hitched the mouthpiece back on its hook
and they drove on in silence, John Andrew leaning against the window and
snivelling slightly. When they got to the house he said, "Nanny, I don't
want John to come to the station in future unless her ladyship or I
specially say he can."

"No, sir, I wouldn't have let him go to-day, only he went on so. Come
along now, John, and take off your coat. Goodness, child, where's your
handkerchief?"

Tony went and sat alone in front of the library fire. "Two men of
thirty," he said to himself, "behaving as if they were up for the night
from Sandhurst--getting drunk and ringing people up and dancing with
tarts at the Old Hundredth... And it makes it all the worse that Brenda
was so nice about it." He dozed a little; then he went up to change. At
dinner he said, "Ambrose, when I'm alone I think in future I'll have
dinner in the library." Afterwards he sat with a book in front of the
fire but he was unable to read. At ten o'clock he scattered the logs in
the fireplace before going upstairs. He fastened the library windows and
turned out the lights. That night he went into Brenda's empty room to
sleep.
